I guess-
You just gave us nice (audio cuts off)
We've
got a few reserves in case- (laughs)
Yeah, yeah.
... in case you get too tough on us. (laughs)
Fair enough.
(laughs)
Got the entire World Cup squad coming to the room full at
once. (laughs)
Oh, yeah, what do you think of the draw?
Has anyone-
Uh, it always sucks. You have to-
Ask them What team's the best one?
You have to pick. We have to be the best team to win anyway so, don't record
it.
Oh, yeah. Nice uh... Very
good.
Yeah.
Oh, right.
Sit. (laughs) Well, welcome to the,
um...
(clears throat)
... Primary Production Select Committee annual review.
Um,
got you for most of the day, Ray, so you'll be thrilled about that.
And...
(laughs)
Spending time in our company.
So, um, w- we'll start off with your introductory remarks and
then-
Sure. ... um, sort of got a, um,
structured agenda-
Yep.
... that we'll w- work through. I think you've probably been, it's been shared with
you I think? Yup, yup, got that. So, um, we'll try and stick to
that as best we can. We'll be flexible.
(laughs)
Thank you, so will we.
So, um, leave it in your hands.
Okay, well, thanks very much. Um, look, and can I start by thanking the committee
for your work across the last year.
Um, it's, it's a very, you're a very active committee, and, um, I
think we all together attend a lot of events together (laughs) .
Um, and just to say, um, we appreciate it as well because it makes a big
difference, you know, whether it's things that are happening on the ground or
whether it's the kind of formal events that we all go to, um, we realize just the,
the commitment on your part as well to supporting the primary sector, uh, and
maintaining those relationships.
Um, uh, look, we've got a pretty strong team here.
Obviously, we cover a lot of ground, um, so, we'll, we'll just, we'll just
bring people and where we kind of get into areas of expertise where that's needed.
Um, I know you've heard from some of our ministers already this week, um,
and-
(clears throat)
... there's a bit more to come on that, uh, I think tomorrow.
But, uh, it's worth repeating that the primary sector is in pretty good
health. Um, exports of food and fiber products, um, remain
strong despite, uh, some trade turbulence.
And we will release our situation outlook for primary industries in the
next week or two. And, um, you know, I expect us to build on the excellent,
excellent result we had, um, last time.
So, look, I'm really proud-
(clears throat)
... of the work that the sector has done across the last year....
happens in a lot of ways, um, through supporting the work of catchment groups on
the ground, backing research to help reduce emissions, supporting farms and growers
to recover from adverse events, uh, market access work of course, and
by maintaining some of the strongest biosecurity measures, uh, in the world.
And of course, not forgetting the sustainability of our seafood sector and, and of
course our important forestry sector.
Uh, as part of our focus on growing, uh, New Zealand's economy, um, in the last
two months, I have visited five of our top six trading
nations. Um, so I've been in Australia, United
States, Japan, Korea, and China, um, with a focus
on maintaining, um, the good relationships that we have there and opening up
market access opportunities wherever we can.
Um, and we have good access in overseas markets, um, but there are also
opportunities for investment back into New Zealand.
And some of the conversation around growing our agriculture sector,
uh, is a real opportunity and one where we're, we are, are
talking about that internationally in order to try and bring, uh, interest and
investment, uh, for those very high value salmon, mussel and oyster products
to see if we can grow that sector out.
Um, certainly for me, um, our reputation's strong
internationally. People like our products, they trust where they come from, uh, and
how we produce them. Uh, and we're in a pretty, uh, positive position, albeit that
there's a lot of competition, uh, particularly from our, our cousins
across, across the ditch.
I also got to visit some of the cutting edge sites and the investments that we have
in methane mitigating technologies, uh, while I was in the United
States. I particularly wanted to see that, um, and happy to talk
about, uh, what that was looking like and what I think the opportunities might be
there. And in Japan, it was good to be able to visit the, you know...
New Zealand imports a large amount of, uh, secondhand vehicles from
Japan, just so happens they drive on the same side of the road as us.
So, um, that's, that's a great export,
uh, to New Zealand. But all of those go through treatment facilities before they
come to New Zealand for biosecurity.
And I was able to go through that facility myself and have a look at how they do
it. Actually found a stink bug on the floor that had dropped out of the heat
treatment chambers, so they do work.
Um, it's quite an important part of the operation.
Obviously those cars are checked again when they arrive in New Zealand, but it's a,
it's a, it's quite a big part of the operation, so it was good to be able to see
that. Um, we made a big investment on this last
year in getting, uh, lifting our plant health and environment laboratory.
And I'd encourage you if you get a chance when you're in Auckland, take a look.
It's next to the pla- uh, the old plant and food laboratory.
Um, it's coming out of the ground quite quickly.
It's on, it's on track and it will give us, um, the capability as the
years go by to be able to manage any large incursions that might
affect our, our, our, um, our plant food industry,
uh, or our forestry industry. But also it's increasing the capacity for us to bring
in new varietals and things, which has always been a bit of a bottleneck, uh, to
bring those. If you bring a new varietal into the country, it might be a prunus
type thing, it can be a couple of years in a quarantine facility before we can be
certain that there are no viruses or diseases that are present.
It's always a bit challenging that area, but we're, we're, we're growing out the
capacity. Our, our facility in Tamaki that looks after plant health is end of
life. Um, and some of those pa- some of the parts of that facility have started to
break down. So we're right on track for getting a new facility 2029, uh, that's
happening now. So we were pretty pleased to get that investment.
It's a substantial investment. Um, it's, it's about, um, 600 odd
million, um, for the development of that.
But it has a 50 year lifespan and that will give us alongside our animal and plant,
our animal health facility out at Wallsville, uh, the one in, the one in Auckland
will cover off both sides, uh, of the equation.
So we'll have animal health and plant health, um, with facilities that guarantee,
uh, we can do the things we need to do in New Zealand.
Um, look, there's obviously been some, uh, challenges, some ups and downs with
weather and other adverse events across the last year, whether it was kind of not
enough rain or too much, uh, or too much wind and those types of things.
There's, there's always been challenges there.
Uh, and of course we successfully dealt with the outbreaks of bird flu in
Otago, although it had a bit of a tail on it in terms of, uh, trade related
matters across the past, uh, year, which we've managed to largely,
uh, restore. We had two fruit fly incursions,
um, uh, last summer. Uh, so we were quite busy through that
Christmas period and of course our team's pretty busy with the hornet at the
moment, uh, in Auckland. So, um, just a bit of an update on the hornet, um, Stu
will be able to give you a bit more on it later, but, um, we've caught 31 queens.
Um, so mo- 20 of those have nests or there's evidence they're nesting.
Um, uh, so that's, that's been good.
Most of these catches have been through visual inspections-
Mm-hmm.
... um, rather than reported, um, sightings.
Four and a half thousand notifications.
So we've kind of whittled that down to the ones that we've f- found that are
actually accurate. And over 2,200 houses visited,
um, in that, um, uh, affected area.
We're starting a leaflet drop at the moment, which will go to a hundred thousand
houses in that North Shore area and that we've extended the buffer zone out to five
Ks. And, uh, we are just wanting to make sure if we can just
get every householder having a bit of a look around the eaves and the decks
and you know, if you've got a wood pile or, um, some particularly,
um, uh, interesting trees and so on in your backyard, if you
can find these little golf ball or tennis size ball, um, nests
and let us know. And that's gonna be our best way, uh, of being able to, of being
able to kind of close this down. Um, so look, we're in a, we've, we've started
well. Um, it's not, it's not, it's not cheap either.
And so just to give you a bit of a sense, you know, we've probably spent around
about a million dollars already on this response.
Um, uh, and we have to be conscious of following the
science in order to kind of spend that money wisely as we go forward.
'Cause each month tick by, ticks by, if you're adding on at roughly a million
dollars a month, uh, in response costs with a lot of people on the ground, it
starts to become very expensive. So we just need to make sure that, um, we're
spending the money upfront, um, in order to try and close this down.
But, you know, we will have to keep making choices about how far we go and how much
we do along the way. So that'll, might be a point of interest for the committee
along the course of next year as well, depending on whether we can close it out
early or whether this kind of starts to, to take a slightly longer course.
Um, probably,
um-... uh, one other thing I did, a couple of things I wanted to mention.
M. bovis, um, M- Minister Hogg had mentioned it, uh, earlier
this week. Uh, this, this is a su- this is really a subst- really substantive
point in our progress on this programme.
And we have spent nearly $800 million on it so far of the $860 million, uh, that
was, that was voted for it. Um, we always thought it was a 10-year
programme. It's likely that we'll be able to conclude it a year earlier than that.
So, where we are right now, uh, sort of seven to, to eight years
into the programme, um, we, we haven't seen the disease
for two years, so we've, we've been able to move to this, um,
confidence phase of absence of the disease.
If we get through one more spring season, autumn and spring calving season,
so this time next year, if we don't see the disease-
(clears throat)
... turn up, we think a year earlier than anticipated, we'd be able to declare
freedom from the disease.
Excellent.
It's substantial because so many people were affected.
Um, hundreds of farmers, uh, who lost, um, who had their cows
culled. Many other, probably thousands of farmers who had notices of direction
at various points throughout the process as we tried to understand what was
happening with their herds. Uh, and, you know, people have been,
um, incredibly good through that. It's not been easy.
I mean, we were a bit bumpy at the start, as you can imagine.
Um, we had nobody dedicated to this and then we had 450 staff on
it, uh, for a long period. And, you know, finding the expertise, the
capability, and building our systems.
We have learnt a lot as a result of d- undertaking this.
A, in terms of, uh, how to ma- how to help
support people and to get in early with those supports.
And, and B, to have the capability to know how to respond to these animal
diseases. It's the biggest one we've tried to get in front of, uh, in
the cattle sector, um, short of TB, which kind of really kicked off, uh, big
time in the '70s and '80s. So, um, we're almost there.
Uh, we're not home yet. Um, we should feel proud about it.
And, you know, what it means for New Zealand, uh, New Zealand, New Zealand farming
systems move their animals around more than almost any other in the world.
Mm-hmm.
That's how we're so productive. And so, uh, if you're moving animals around a
lot, you, you run the risk of spreading disease quite rapidly.
So, to maintain the farming system we had, removing this disease was important to
New Zealand. Uh, we are only one of two countries in the world that doesn't have
the disease. Uh, Norway being the other one.
Uh, but avoiding lameness, mastitis, uh, and aborted
calves, and, uh, farmers having to be much more
discerning about where their animals come from in the future, uh, is something
we've managed to avoid. So, uh, almost there.
Uh, and just did want to acknowledge that a huge amount of work has been done in
that area. Um, last few points. Um, we
have 121 performance measures. Um, it's a big department.
Um, not so much, uh, you know, it's 3,250 staff.
It's not so much the size staffing-wise, but the breadth of what we
cover. Uh, we've achieved 107 of those 121
performance measures, about 88%.
So, we were about 89% last year, so we're roughly in the same place.
Um, but I would note that seven of them weren't active, i.e.
we didn't have to activate those measures because we didn't have to administer
adverse events funds and things like that, uh, in particular, well, particular
programmes to h- of recovery. Uh, so we were probably a little bit
better than, than we showed on the performance there.
But that's, that's all detailed out.
And I did want to acknowledge that, that we've taken a pretty strong disciplined
approach to our financial management across the last year or two in particular.
Um, we were able to increase our capital investment, uh, in MPI's critical
systems and assets. So sometimes these things don't get seen, but they're actually
really important. If we're managing the place well, we can keep investing.
Um, so that Plant Health Laboratory is a big investment, um, ahead of
getting the government's investment, um, uh, capital investment, we, we put in
nearly $20 million of our own investment to get to the point of having a business
case that would support that development.
Um, digitizing the trade certification.
So this is kind of getting, if you think about export certificates for all of the
products that leave New Zealand, moving from paper to digitization.
And with China, uh, we've just agreed to go further with that to almost get to
100%. Um, so we are leading with them in the world at digitizing
trade. Uh, our upgrade of the ETS forestry system
and, um, the Cameras on Boats programme, uh, there's been a big investment.
Uh, opening of, well, I guess I'd say they're not new, but, um, two international
airports reopened, Hamilton and Dunedin.
And so we had-
Oh. ... to staff those, uh, made sure the facilities were okay.
So Dunedin was a bit of a refresh. Hamilton, we had to, uh, work with the airport
companies and get the investment right and so on.
And I think you've had some of those folks through here.
Uh, a new mail center was opened with New Zealand Post and Customs.
(clears throat)
That's got new technology in it. That technology, uh, is quite amazing.
Worth having a look at if you, if you want to have a, have a, a view of that.
Just seeing the, um, 3D technology that we're able to use
for looking at parcels and things to see what's inside them.
So we're in a much stronger position there.
And some of that technology-
(clears throat)
... we want to invest in, in the airport infrastructure going forward with some of
those machines are now kind of getting towards the end of their useful
life. And, um, we did reduce our consultant and contractor ing-
expenditure by $25 million. So we're down from $40 to $15 million and that's,
uh-
(clears throat) ... also given us quite a bit more headroom.
We were able to carry forward $16 million in underspends, uh, to
invest in biosecurity responses, which we're really grateful to be able to do
that. And I guess we've been able to present ourselves in a way that says, uh, we
can make savings within our boat. Um, we can operate it, uh,
under the cost and we've been given the opportunity to transfer some of that money
into priorities that, um, a lo- a lot of people, um, see as being
things that we need to keep investing in.
So, um, I'll probably leave it there and, um, just, uh,
thank my team for what's been a, a pretty good year.
Yeah.
Anyways.
Y- That's true.
So, um, I know Sam's got a question about the,
um, biosecurity f- facility in Tamaki,
so.
Mm-hmm. Yes,
That one first. Joe?
The... Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank you for your introduction there and all the
work that you and all of the team do. Kia ora.
Um, we had, uh, some plant importers, uh,
in here recently. And they were talking about the proposed facility in Mount
Albert and, um, saying that it's, it's very expensive and
it's probably based on, uh, outdated
technologies. Technologies have moved a significant amount,
um, since it was, it was first concepted....
and that, um, they feel that the industry hasn't been
properly consulted. It's expensive.
Obviously, the government's in a tight fiscal situation.
Um, are you confident that that spend of what
will be-
Yeah.
... 500 mil, potentially more-
... is what the, what the market needs and also-
Yeah.
... will serve the country well given-
Yeah. ... given the significant cost?
You know, g- uh, really good question. Y- yes, I am.
And we actually consulted widely on this.
Um, uh, I'm aware of the sector that, that and, and the individuals, um,
'cause they raise those matters with me regularly.
Uh, there is an increase in cost and th- when I started
this job seven years ago, uh, one of the big things that, uh, I was confronted with
was a large amount of complaint about the fact people couldn't bring products into
the country and there was a long queue because we didn't have enough facilities to
bring them in to quarantine. So I've set about trying to fix that.
It's taken years to get to a point where we got the investment, where we completed
the business case. That business case has been through multiple iterations, uh, and
through cabinet. Uh, we've had to prove that, um, this is the right thing to
do. And, um, and I'm grateful that we're on the way.
The Tamaki facility that we have, you know, for example, fortunately, we'd made
some early investment in new, um, glasshouse facilities because, uh, we'd
run into a problem in our Tamaki facility in terms of the...
When you have these, um, facilities, you're trying to make sure that whatever
you're testing, nothing can escape from the facility into the wider environment.
And we found we've got a problem in our Tamaki facility, we already had to shift
everything out of there into these glasshouses that we've kind of already got ahead
of schedule. Um, so one, one of the things that, um,
that's really important, uh, for New Zealanders to realize is that
we are... So much of our economy is dependent on,
um, you know, the biologicals, if you like.
Um, you know, we're largely, you know, our growth comes off, uh,
growing protein and growing fruit, uh, vegetables, and our
forestry sector. And, and for the size of
those, we really need to be able to have a facility that's at the
state-of-the-art level where we can, we can test products.
If we got another, if we got another PSA type outbreak that we had with the
kiwifruit, um, virus, you want to know that we can do all the
sampling, testing and management of that in New Zealand, not send the samples to
Australia. And a really good example of that was with the bird flu outbreak we had
in Dunedin. Because we had rebuilt the lab at
Wallaceville, we were able to do all the sampling and testing in New Zealand, we
didn't have to send it to Australia and get into a long queue of waiting to see
what happens. So it's the same on the plant health side.
That's the other big side of the economy.
And if we get a bark beetle in a forest, uh, or we get
something, uh, something, uh, within our, um, I don't know, we could
get a virus in the tomato sector or in the potato sector or in the onions, we wanna
be able to test those things and check them out.
The importation, the importation side of it's actually the smaller part.
It's about 10% of the total value of that facility.
The big thing is having a laboratory where our people
can contain viruses and diseases and not allow them to
escape, um, and be able to do their important work here in New Zealand.
So, what we do is we underpin, um,
we underpin this $60 billion of export earnings,
uh, by having an animal facility that's, uh, it, it has
the, the most capable laboratories in the country, and at the other
end of the country we have a plant health facility that can do the same thing.
Right.
So that covers off both sectors. There is a...
You're right though, there is a cost implication.
And, you know, everybody wants, everybody wants the services,
um, nobody's that keen on paying a bit more to get them.
And w- and the charge out rates for using the plant health
laboratory, we have increased them.
I mean, essentially the state was subsidizing it at about 95% of the cost, and we
shifted that to 50/50.
Um, just on that cost. And, and you're saying, you're saying a
few projects under this government-
Yep.
... um, they, they looked at and, and the-
... alternatives put forward. Um, this is a big project,
right?
Yep.
500 mil, potentially more.
Um, is, is that, is the, the size and scope of the
project necessary or, or is there a way that it could be done in a more
fiscally constrained manner?
No. It's a- it's a- it's absolutely necessary, um, because, because of
the scale of what we're protecting.
So, um, unlike, unlike almost any other country in the
world, New Zealand exports 95% of the food it produces.
It's how we make our money. And so, um, so we don't
export our surpluses. Um, there's only five million of us, and we produce
enough food for, you know, 10% of 400 million people so that's-
No, no. I, I get that wider picture that you're trying to frame and, and that
that's not really what the questions about.
It's a, a $500 million facility. Is it...
I'm seeing many examples in around the country like-
Yeah.
Is, is there... I mean, that's a big gold standard facility but could you do it
with a-
No. ... with a more toned down facility and give a couple of hundred billion back to
the taxpayer?
Uh, no, and we're not going to-
No.
... because we've already signed up to do this-
Yep.
... and it's been through cabinet and it's had multiple reviews on the way through
to getting there.
So this is, this is, this is, uh... In order to get that level of investment
through the cabinet and through the finance minister, it's had to go through
multiple iterations.
Oh.
It's, it's come to this point. So,
um, no, look, I stand, I stand by the...
Look, I have-
Let this go. I just wanted some clarity
No, no. W- just, but just to give a-
They're good questions. To give a bit of a sense of it, I mean, I have in my career
built prisons, residential facilities,
laboratories. Uh, the spend on this, you know, um,
the prisons that we built in my time and that would now cost one to 1.2,
$1.4 billion to build. Um, this is a, this is a roughly sort of
five to $600 million investment and it gives you a 50 year
return. It looks about right to me. It looks about right to me for ease and lease.
Sure.
But, but look at... You're right, it is a big investment, um, and, uh, we've taken
it very seriously.
Thank you.
Steve, you got a sup?
Yeah, just a sup. I mean, there's no argument on the vital importance
of perfect bio-security, protecting, um,
our-
... productive sector here from incursions.
That's a good explanation. The need for a quarantine facility, absolutely, no
question about that. I think the question arises
around where technology has significantly- Yup.
improved, uh, in the last decade, but partic- even in the last five
years- Yup. ... where there are much lower cost means of
testing germplasm and so forth, and whether there's,
um, in no way, uh, compromising-
Yeah. ... the strength of the biosecurity net, um, whether
there are ways that some of this testing could be being done-
Yeah. ... at a lower cost for the
benefit of industry. And- I, I think that will happen as well.
So, I, I think, I think what's gonna happen is you're gonna get both of those
things. But it's not going to replace the fact that the vast amount of work that
happens every day in the laboratories, the, the, the testing of material coming
into New Zealand is actually a small part of that facility. Hm.
Um, it just happens to be the facility that has to do it, 'cause there are,
there are some private sector capabilities, but they're not at the standard,
um, is the difficulty. And so, um, yes,
AI is going to make a massive difference and it already is.
And I saw that when I was in the United States, uh, but you're still gonna need
laboratories. And, and every day those people are
running any number of tests on,
um, things that are picked up in New Zealand, uh, or that are
routine, uh, in our, in our plant sector.
So no, look, I, I think you're gonna need both.
But that, that will reduce the cost and potentially open up more options, I, I
agree with that. Yeah. Thank you. Thank
So- That's where I was heading with it. Thanks, Steve.
It's comp- (coughs) It's complementary, not, not a replacement of.
Yeah, I've got a final sup on that. So, new facility
in conjunction with new technology that's gonna be coming
along, what's the likelihood of being able to speed up
the process so that, um, new cultivars
or, or- Mm-hmm. ... germplasm isn't stuck in limbo for- Yeah. ...
you know, years? Mm-hmm. Yeah, and, um, uh, the
biosecurity team have been out consulting quite widely on how to do that.
'Cause we agree that, uh, the process could be better. Mm-hmm.
Um, it's... If you sort of, how did we get
here? And this is the difficulty with
biosecurity. We face it with the
hornets. People would like us to do almost everything from
Invercargill, you know, to Cape Reinga.
Um, so when these things arrive, people become seized by it and they expect us to
resolve it. In order to try and stop these things from happening
and to invest in them really, pe- nobody really wants to do that.
But when they arrive, they expect the services to be there. Mm-hmm.
So, um, w- when I think about, um, this area, a
lot, you know, if you go back to 2010, New Zealand's kiwi, kiwifruit
industry was almost wiped out. Mm-hmm.
Uh, we were lucky we had another cultivar that they had invested in, um, through
Plant & Food that, uh, so the goal, you know, came to the fore.
Uh, a lot of people were hurt and damaged in that, uh, and many came out better out
the other end. We still had PSA, um, but,
and we also, we settled, I settled it, $50
million, uh, to conclude the, uh, court case on that
that had been in the, in the Supre- uh, heading to the Supreme Court.
So the cost of that was vast, um, and the risk of it was
huge. And so, so much of the
import health standard, um, development beyond that became
much more risk averse, um, because we couldn't have
that happen again. Um, and so it did tighten the procedures and
it did slow things down, and what the team are trying to do now is say, "Okay, we
know more, we're in a better place, how do we start to make sure that we're
not being overly restrictive, that we're holding things for too long?" The
challenge in all of this is when you talk to the science folks involved,
a, a disease like Xylella, these things are
invisible. So what happens is someone says, "Well, I've got these stalks." They
don't have them. "We've been to the farm." They, they might show up.
We, I, I saw... I was in the Plant Health Lab the other day, some of these things
show up 18 months into their growth.
And so, uh, it's very, um, it's not an easy
thing- Mm-hmm. ... uh, to manage this balance between...
And, and if you look back on the PSA thing, you know, we were trying to assist the
kiwifruit sector and an importer to bring pollen into New Zealand.
We thought we'd done all of the right checks and we thought it was okay.
That turned out not to be, uh, and, and
the cost of that then becomes vast.
And so, I think we're just trying to get, we are trying to get that balance a,
bit, a bit more right than where it has been and to try and speed up the
process without compromising. One, one thing that we're
quite keen to, to get, to express to people is
they can share these glasshouses for a lot of varieties.
You don't have to go out on your own.
There are ways to team up to reduce the cost as an importer. Hm.
Um, so y- you know, I think, I think we have to help people with a bit of that
knowledge as well.
Right. Uh, Jo?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you, Ray.
Nice to see you and the team this morning.
Yeah.
I just want to acknowledge, uh, you and your team for all the work that you do
supporting our rural communities and farmers.
And, you know, I've got to know a few of you particularly through adverse weather
events and what have you, so, um, I just thought it was important to acknowledge
you and the team for all the work that you do.
I want to talk about money now.
Money.
Money, um, makes the world go round.
Um, I see that there was, um, an underspend
of, uh, quite a substantial amount.
So you had an estimated expenditure of 906
million,
but seems you've only spent 800 million.
Now, I note further in your annual report, you've
talked about being able to get approval to
retain 17 million of underspend towards
biosecurity. So,
given the current climate with biosecurity and, and the hornet
incursion and-
Yup.
... other potential incursions-Are you, uh, you
also mentioned, sorry, I'm kind of thinking as, as I'm thinking.
You also talked about the ability to invest in, um, priority
areas that are, um,
that, that, that might be identified.
Yeah, yep.
Um, so
with the underspend, do you actually have
to give that back to the Crown and then
ask for some t- or do, can you not just ?????
and say, "Look, we're gonna need it." Because 17
million retained-
Yeah.
... approval retained for biosecurity is merely a
drop in the bucket, considering the expense you've just
acknowledged with hornets and, and what have you.
And if we do have serious incursions, you know, where is the
money gonna come from because the budget is
limited.
Yes.
So, should you not be able to retain anything you under spend
and just hold it? And subsequent to that,
um, I also want to check out, oh, you answer that and then I've got
??????
Yeah, yeah.
No that's, no that's- I was gonna say, there's, there's a lot to unpack there Jo.
Yeah, sorry. (laughs)
No, no, no, no. No, I think it's a really fea- and, and really good question.
So, uh, we would love to retain it all.
Yeah.
Um, uh, but, um, uh, no look, the, there's, there's a couple of
bits to that. Some of the appropriations are
multi-year.
Yeah. So, um, so an under spend is often a timing related issue.
Right.
So we might have them across a three or five year period.
Oh.
So that's, that's not so bad.
We can roll that money forward.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah. Um, we do have to keep forecasting it.
Um, the, the, uh, but some of that money was not, was not, that
is not the case, that, you know, uh, uh, a large amount of it was appropriated in
the year. And, uh, you're right. Um, we go through a
process, um, towards the end of each year, and then it's, it's sort of
mocked up in October following the budget.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, where we, the decision gets made about what we can retain in under spends.
So what we tend to do is, where we have a
significant under spend, um, and we know we've got priorities coming
up that we're not sure about how to fund, uh, we've made those recommendations.
We've done that probably all the time I've been here.
And, and look, across governments, it's been pretty well received,
particularly in the, in the biosecurity area where I think there's an understanding
that, um, costs are high, these incursions sometimes can't all be
managed within a year or can't all be measured across easily at the
beginning. I mean, klip is a good example, you know.
Mm-hmm.
Um, it's the what have you really got on your hands, how much are you really gonna
need to spend. So, um, we were really pleased to get that 17
million dollar carryfor, we thought that was reasonable.
I think it was about 50% of the under spend that we could, that we could,
um, really, uh, tackle. And look, we will continue to
do that. Um, I, I think there is probably a
conversation to be had about the, uh, biosecurity
border levies.
Mm-hmm.
Um, that we collect and whether, um,
if I think about the hornet incursion,
the hornet incursion is most likely to have come on
a, um, nest on a container. So this hasn't come as larvae-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, like fruit fly. So it's probably come on a, through on a container.
So it's definitely come across the border that way.
Um, and so
you, you could pretty strongly argue that the b- border levy we
collect on, you, you know, managing the containers that come into the country, that
there's a contribution to the cost-
Mm-hmm.
... of therefore managing this program.
So that's, that's a conversation that we are starting to have and think about, is
to whether, whether the levy system that we've got is doing
enough.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, whether it could do a bit more. Uh, we don't think there's any need to increase
levies, that's not where we're coming from.
We think there's probably enough scope within those levies, um, to be able to kind
of help apply them. Which would, I think, deal with some of the issue you're
talking about, it's kind of where we build a bit, bit of a surplus-
Mm-hmm. Yeah,
yeah. ... and then it disappears. Where, and then, then all of a sudden we're back here
saying, gosh, we need 20 million for an outbreak here or something there.
So-
Yeah.
We think we've got the mechanism there.
But there's conversation to be had, um, with ministers about that.
Right. So supplementary, um, Mr. Chair.
Um, I think every time you come before the committee I
always ask about Māori agribusiness.
Māori agribusiness.
Opportunities. And there used to be, it's, it's
not too technical but there used to be, you know, the separate
funding which is now incorporated into the whole
pool and ring-fenced. And I just wanna check that that is
still ring-fenced specifically-
Yes.
... as the same amount, not reduced, and whether
there's, 'cause there's some great work happening in that space-
Yes.
... looking at your annual report-
Thanks.
... and there's probably potential to be able to-
Yeah.
... use more money.
There is.
And is that something that you could do with under spend as
well?
Sure, we can go.
Sure, look, the first part of the question, I'm happy to confirm that that money
you talk of re- is ring-fenced remains so.
So the same funding levels are available to help, uh, drive Māori's participation
in the farming sector. Um, are there further opportunities? Of course.
Mm-hmm.
And we're really enjoying going after some of those.
Okay.
That was just my question.
Yeah. No, look, I mean it's a really good question because, um,
we, we've invested quite a bit in trying to get, um, some important
reports out as well that kind of talk about the sector, to raise the
profile of the sector.
Yeah.
Um, because we want New Zealanders to understand just how extensive
the, um,
Māori investments are in the primary sector and what the opportunity is there to
grow. Uh, there is still a lot of under-utilized land in those areas.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Or, or land where returns per hectare are, are poor compared
to what they could be. And so, you know, benefits New Zealand, benefits Māori
communities, uh, and families as well-
... if we can kind of lift that. So, Glen's, uh, Glen's got the funding, I think,
to be able to do that. Um, I think it's just constantly trying to reach out.
So, um, and you know, look, uh, if, if, if you spot things that you
think uh, uh, would value, uh, our support,
then, um, you should feel free to let us know.
Thank you.
Yep. We can stay. We're gonna have some more questions on that later-
Mm-hmm.
... I think, aren't we? Yeah, sure, you can.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, thank you. Um,
I'm wondering about the-
... this establishment of staff
in, uh, this previous financial year.
But th- in this term, I suppose.
Okay.
Um, there seemed to be, I seemed to be at variance with the minister
when I suggested that there had been 400 roles disestablished and
108 of those were in biosecurity. And he came back that there
are now more frontline staff in biosecurity.
I wonder if you can give us a hard figure on, um,
the employment levels within MPI-
Yeah.
... particularly in that Biosecurity Agency between sort of '22 and '25.
Yeah. I'll get Stu to come up on the biosecurity, but, um-
Thank you.
Just, just, just on the, um... You're right.
We reduced the size of the organization by
about, gosh, 398 people, I think. It was close to
400.
Yup.
You're, you're right, 378. There was a... Number was, was high.
Um, some of those, uh, you will remember were filled roles and some weren't,
but we, but nevertheless, they were all taken out of the system.
Yes.
Um, so today, we are operating at 3,450 people.
Yeah.
Um, we could operate at a higher level than that, but we're o- we
don't need to. We're okay at the moment.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so we've been able to, um, operate a bit under the, um, we-
we, you know, anywhere around about three and a half thousand people, 3,550 is
about where we could operate-
Yeah.
... um, the organization. So there always, there's always a bit of vacancy in
there. Um, so we've got that under control.
We haven't had to take people out of the front end of the business.
We did take a lot, um, of change out of the sort of more in
center here, in Wellington. That, that was where the opportunity was.
On biosecurity, I'll get Stu to confirm, but I, um, look, biosecurity
is one of the areas where we've kept being able to invest, um,
because
the majority of the biosecurity funding is cost-recovering.
So it's outside of the core crowd. So, Stu, what does those numbers look like,
yeah?
Yeah. So, uh, on the front line, so the, the, you know, the border, border
workforce biosecurity, as Ray said, uh, we have- we have continued to
invest in it.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, just with, uh, airport passenger numbers increasing, uh, the, you
know, the new initiatives at the border space.
So, uh, we've, uh, for '24, '25, uh, we've had an
increase of 95 personnel in the border frontline
space-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, from the previous year. So that's, uh, that's recruitment of quarantine
officers to (00:02:28) building up that group, which,
like I say, is, is volume, so it's started to continue to grow in that
space. And so, um, and the cost recovery levy mechanism allows
us to do that, uh, to match the demand in that space.
So probably to, just to... You're probably thinking some came out, some came in.
The, um, if you think about, um,
MPI has, has some core corporate head office people in a, in
a live policy and market access function, and then it has those big business
units. And biosecurity is our biggest business unit with about
40% of our resources and staff.
Yep.
Stuart also has a head o- a head office function, if you like, (laughs) um, that's
dedicated to him, um, and his team, as well as all those people that, that
you will see in uniforms and, you know, in labs and out at the front
end. Most of that 108 came out of the, his-
Yeah.
... his overhead or head office related function, if you like.
Um, that just... And so what's going back in is more
people at the, perhaps at the beginning. I say broadly at the uniformed end.
They're not all uniformed, but broadly at the uniformed end, um, where we've
got rising volumes and so on.
All right.
Something there?
Yeah. So that's useful to understand, very useful to understand.
Um,
because as you've rightly articulated the importance of biosecurity
to us, um-
Mm-hmm.
... it's right that we should be asking questions about-
Yes.
... why we'll be reducing staffing numbers-
... is how, how that's justified. One question I've got
is in terms of the sort of technical scientific capability.
Um, I understand as a, you know, anecdotal example
that Peter Dearden's been assisting in the, um, hornets issue because of his
expertise on wasps and so forth, uh, Professor
Dearden. But I wonder if that is a
capability that could be stronger in our Biosecurity
Agency.
Yeah. Look, uh, so
we w- w- so we do have deep expertise in biosecurity-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, for, for a lot of our core pest disease risk areas.
Uh, we- we've got deep expertise-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, that's incredibly valuable.
Yep. Uh, some of our, some of our people are, are world-leading experts in their
particular fields.
Mm-hmm.
Um, you know, bee health, for example, you know, one of the leading people in the
world works for us, uh, in that space.
Um, but, but all that, but of course, uh, you know, we can't have an
expert, a science expert, given these are very specific
disciplines for every single thing-
Right.
... employed in, in MPI and biosecurity.
So what we do is we leverage, we leverage off expertise
elsewhere when we do have some of these things like hornet,
uh, clams, callipa. You know, we t- we tap into expertise
domestically in the system, but also
internationally, uh, and our, our scientists, uh, working
for us, uh, also, you know, work really hard to maintain those professional
networks and connections. So, um, so that's, and it's, I think, you know,
that's entirely appropriate that we do draw on these expertise.
The Technical Advisory Group we established around hornets,
um, that's got a mix of, uh, of New Zealand, uh, entomologists
as well as, uh, offshore as well to, to provide exactly a
grounded, uh, perspective. But yes, there's a core science
expertise that underpins our laboratory work, our surveillance,
diagnostics, um, our standard setting, uh, and,
uh, and we do work hard to maintain that, that, that full depth, uh,
within MPI, within biosecurity as well.
Thank you. Jo?
So, yes, thank you. Thank you, um, Mr. Chair.
Um, I wanted to talk, yeah, about the staff reductions.
And I know that, um-
Um, you mentioned, Ray, that some, uh, well, a, a lot of
them have come from that back office or backroom area, and I would
also argue that they are just as important-
Yep.
... as your frontline because they provide so much support to your
frontline. And I note in the annual review,
there's a, a few circumstances where,
um, things haven't been met, your goals or standards haven't
been met, and I should say with regard to things like written parliamentary
questions being done on time, ministerial
satisfaction, um, on policy
advice, which to me kind of seems a bit ironic given the current
government's the one that has, um, insisted with the staffing reductions.
But would you feel, would you think it would be fair to say that
because of the staff reductions, it does increase pressure
on the staff that are still performing those back-office
functions, given they're probably doing almost twice as much as what they probably
were, and that could be the reason why some of those standards
aren't being met?
I'm, I'm hoping you could help me out with the parliamentary questions.
But, um, uh-
Not a chance. (laughs)
(laughs) Uh, n- no, look, I mean, I...
to perhaps pick up where you started, um, I, I agree with you that-
Mm-hmm.
... I, I don't, uh, generally tend to think of the people as being front or back.
No. That's
I mean, whether they're supporting me or-
That's
right. ... uh, s- someone over here or someone at the f- or you're in a
uniform. You know, we need them all-
Mm-hmm.
... I mean, in order to be successful.
Um, but it's true to say that in, in looking at where we could make gains and
efficiencies, we, we, we went to the part w- what was least
impactful. We didn't, you know... I think that made sense.
We didn't want to go where our fisheries officers were, or animal welfare
inspectors. Things we'd worked hard to build over time, we didn't want to undo
those.
Um, so we did... Yes, we've had to think, rethink systems, about how we do
things. I think always... Look, my experience in head
office-type, type functions is there is always a bit of
room to move, s- particularly in bigger departments.
Mm-hmm. And, you know, we're sizeable enough to be able to kind of always find some
efficiency in there.
Mm-hmm.
So, I don't think we've cut ourselves to a position where, you know,
people can't do their job. What I would say though, and it's a, uh, point you
raised about this, uh, on the government servicing side.
It's a bit that is not so easily seen unless you work in
government.
Mm-hmm.
Um, it's not something private-sector companies have to deal with.
So, you know, the, the, the parliamentary question numbers
have... I don't know but they've almost quadrupled.
You know, like the, the number... Uh, the increase in those is
vast, um, as is in the OIA area, uh, so that
whole servicing bit there does get more and more-
Mm-hmm.
... pressure in it. And we put a... When I arrived, we put a lot of extra people in
there because it was really understaffed.
Um, w- well, I think we've still got a good complement in there that, that they
work pretty hard.
Yeah.
And we do sometimes run a bit over time. That's true to say.
Mm-hmm.
Um, on the policy advice, look, it's, you know, it's okay.
Just one minister.
It's a bit subjective. Um, but, um, you know, it, it was
mostly okay. I don't think... I don't think that's a lack of people, but fair to
say, um, some of my colleagues here that you've probably met, um,
Fiona Duncan, Alistair Cameron, who run two large parts of our policy function are
exceptional people. They've had a lot to do.
Mm-hmm.
They've, they've had a, they've had a big work program.
And we, you know, we did reduce the size of the policy function.
And so people are, are working hard.
So, look, I don't think we're in a position where we can't do our job-
No.
... to be honest with you. Um, I think there's...
I think we continue to be efficient there. Um, but yeah, there are a...
There have been some increases in the areas.
So, the, um, with the increase, the pressure, increased pressure
on staff, um, with those reductions, staff morale and staff
satisfaction, is, is... how's that?
Well, well, I think we're in a pretty good position.
Yeah.
But, you know, m- maybe I would say that.
Um-
(laughs)
Uh, no-
Everyone's smiling. (laughs)
Yeah.
(laughs) Uh-
Except for that guy.
(laughs)
(laughs) Who is that?
(laughs) Oh, he's paid not to smile.
(laughs)
Um, uh-
(laughs) ... yeah. It's his job. Uh, no, no. With... The...
If you had a look at the, uh, the whole public service undertakes their-
Yeah.
We recently did that survey. Um, we looked really closely at that. We were very...
We managed to get, uh... I think the last time we did it, only just over
50% of our staff participated. We managed to get the participation rate up well
over 70%, so that was good, um, because we wanted to hear from our people what
they actually thought. Um, and, um, w- we came out of
that really pleased, um, with the results we had.
There, there are some areas that I think people are looking for career development.
That was one of the things-
Mm-hmm.
... they raised with us. They'd like to see more opportunity put in front of them
about how they can advance their careers, and that probably goes with the fact that
they had very high ratings about, um, the work that they do.
So people like the work they do.
Mm-hmm.
They feel it's important and that they make a difference.
Um, there's no doubt, um, you know, people feel, uh, pressure in
their jobs, in, in work performance, but I think that probably
goes anywhere you work, in fairness. Um, but I didn't see...
There were no results where we were out of kilter.
Uh, so I, I take some, some solace in that.
Um, I get around the organization a lot. I...
In this last year, I visited almost every office in the country-
Mm-hmm.
... um, quite deliberately to talk about the plan we had to grow, to grow the
sector-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, to look after these important areas we're talking about.
And I, you know, I've had very good engagement with people.
I think it's important that we continue to
look after and increase our investments in these areas that Stu was talking about.
Biosecurity frontline staff, you can't, you can't afford to have them with queues
and waiting times where pressure builds and it becomes an
unsavory environment to work in. Um, you can't have that.
You can't have fisheries officers that are out on their own because we don't have
enough people. You can't have animal welfare inspectors going out onto farms, uh,
where things might be difficult on their own because there aren't enough people.
Mm-hmm.
So we've really wanted to make sure we've looked after that so that the health and
safety of our people is, is at the forefront.
So, look, look, I think it's a... it's an ongoing calibration.
I wouldn't say we've cracked it, but I would say we're in a reasonable position and
we're-
Mm-hmm.
... performing pretty well. Um, and I think we just have to keep an eye to those
areas of pressure.
Well, my final comment then, questions to Alex....
take advantage of it, um, is that, um, despite those challenges and
the staffing reductions that you faced, uh, your team do an amazing job and they're
always excellent to interact with. So, well done.
That's great feedback. We'll, we'll take that.
Very good. Right, we'll move on to performance of business
units. Um, and first heading
we have is around, um, which there's already been
some questions around Māori partnerships and, and investment.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. So Glen, Glen Weber-
Yes.
... is the
head of this unit. We're, we're a bit lucky to have Glenn.
He was, he did, uh, uh, head Te Ara Whiti with the,
um, uh, Crown Māori relations organization with him
coming. Well, going off doing your own thing and then we, we got him
back. Um, so he, he's made a big impact.
So can you just talk about it?
So, um, last year or might have been at the
mid-year scrutiny, Glenn, you, um, said to us
that you've
struggled at times, or, or the unit struggled at times to
get, um, uh,
Māori business interested in-
Yeah. ... in taking up some of the grants.
And, um, because the question was asked if it was thought
that because the grants hadn't been, uh, given out,
that the, uh,
unit was, um,
being a bit tight-fisted, but (laughs) for want
of... I'm just paraphrasing here.
Um,
is that still the case? Uh, are you, um...
And I'd note that in your earlier answer said you'd put, put quite a bit of
effort into, um, reaching out
to and, and, and making businesses aware of, of what your
function is. How's that going?
Uh, thank you for your question. Uh, before I answer it, Kia ora.
Ngā mihi tēnei ki te komiti. I just want to pick up on a comment Ray made in his
introductory comments about, uh, the pleasure it's been to be out on the road and
to have interactions with some of you in the course of the past year-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, whether they be significant events like the Ohuwhenua Awards, uh-
That's right.
... whether it be the Whangara launch.
And Suzy, I think I, if I recall correctly, you were at the deed signing for Ngāti
Haua-
Yes,
... for those treaty settlements.
So I just want to acknowledge the committee and its members have been really active
and the group has spaced it. Thank you for it.
In relation to your question, um, there, there are a couple of dynamics that are
all interacting at the same time. So, so the way, I'll just
talk a bit more about some of those contextual things first.
The short answer to question is no, we're doing much better this year.
Um, our networks are good. Our people on the ground are connecting well.
We've had good interest.
What we're always trying to strike is the right balance of supporting projects
that, uh,
that appropriately respect that we are using public money.
Yeah.
So we have a high level of scrutiny over the projects that we support.
So if we ever come up to a situation where we are underspent on some of those,
but
I'm confident to say it, it would be a situation now because, um, we're looking
very carefully at the nature of the projects we do support.
So the short answer to your question is yes, um, there is, uh, good
connection and, and good opportunities for us to this year.
Thank you. Uh, Jo?
Yup, thank you. Um, thank you for that.
Um, look, we all know there's huge, um,
opportunity as far as the Māori economy goes, um, untapped
opportunity. And, and Ray, you alluded to that earlier on.
One of the things you mentioned, Ray, was if, if we are
aware of people or opportunities, um, and
it's sort of on the back of what Miles said about perhaps people not taking
up on these opportunities, how do people go about
taking, um, those opportunities and how, um,
how can we ensure that, that that is being, um, put
out there so that people are aware of those opportunities?
Yeah. Thank you for that question.
Um, there are a number of channels that these opportunities become, uh,
available. So we have a network, a sm- a relatively small network, but a nationwide
network of, uh, regional advisors-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, on the ground. They have contacts with, uh, important Māori
organizations. Um, over the past year, we've spent a little more time
focusing on post-settlement governance entities because, uh, a lot of the assets
returned through settlements are primary sector assets.
So we go up there a level, we go on the ground.
Uh, an important thing to acknowledge, of course, is that a lot of the
interaction, well, not all of the interaction with Māori entities happens just
through our business unit.
Mm-hmm.
There are other parts of MPI that, that really constructively interact and, and
we're reasonably good at connecting across, uh, Tujuanaako
and, uh, fisheries, other parts of the business.
So, um, there are multiple channels.
Um, I don't think we can underest- underestimate the importance of significant
events like the Ohuwhenua Awards where-
Yeah.
... where people go and see and celebrate excellence, um, of Māori in the primary
sector. Uh, some of the comments, uh, that came after this year's awards
were people looking forward to next year-
Mm-hmm.
... and, and seeing the way that, uh, the, the people from the north and
people from Mahi were celebrated.
Uh, I, I received comments directly in the evening from other people in the
saying, "We're ready for horticulture next year."
Mm-hmm.
"We want to have a go and we want to raise our game." So there, there are multiple
ways these opportunities are, are made available.
Okay. Thank you.
Steve. Yeah, I'm just wondering about, um, forestry
specifically, um, supporting Ngā Pou
Atua Tane.
Ngā Pou Atua Tane.
Yeah. And, um,
what's going on with that in support of a Māori forestry
strategy?
Um, my colleague Sam Keenan, uh, spends a bit more time in that
particular space, but, uh, I'll, I'll start with an answer and give him the
opportunity to-
Mm-hmm.
... provide more detail.
So, um,
they did release a strategy this year, and, uh, more than a strategy, they
also had their first Forest Māori, Māori Forestry Awards, which happened about
three weeks ago-
Mm-hmm.
... in Rotorua, uh, where they celebrated, um, some really-
Mm-hmm. ... good achievements of Māori in, in forestry.
Mm-hmm.
... but forestry is one of these areas where a significant part of the Māori
(laughs) estate base, uh, when when Whenua Māori has trees on it.
I think the number sits at about-
... 700,000 hectares across the country.
So, an important sector, forestry, we're just looking for a way to help
drive forward the economic, uh, develop- contribution of Māori in forestry.
Let me check if Sam
(whispers)
Um, yeah, Nga Poutana, uh, uh, a representative group, um,
of, of, uh, landowners, uh, and, and forest
owners, uh, as Glen highlighted, two weeks ago, they had their
AGM and, and released the strategy document.
Uh, there's a number of pou, uh, rel- you know, that, that relate to that
strategy. And, and naturally, there's really strong alignment with Te Uru
Rākau's and the government's priorities.
Uh, one area of particular strong alignment is, is the desire,
uh, for more vertical integration.
And so as, as Māori interests are expanding from, uh, forest
landowners into forest owners, and then ultimately, as, as
those trees mature, into production and, and, and manufacturing and
industry. So, we're, we're at the space now where,
uh, we're, we're working through those areas of alignment.
And we're looking at projects to really, uh,
to, to, to support, uh, to drive some action.
Uh, alongside that, um, within, uh, Māori
agribusiness, there was a, uh, a, a, a grant
to support implementation of our claim.
So there's been a lot of support, uh, both in Glen's team and my team, uh, I
guess, to help the, the formation of this representative group and the
strategy development.
Just have one minute.
Yeah. So, in practical terms, what does the access to that grant look like
and what sort of, um, money are we talking?
Hm. Uh, looking back or looking forward?
Looking forward.
Yeah.
Ah, look, so, uh, we, we have a product, Wood Processing Growth
Fund, uh, which is, is a product that can support
the commercial investment activity-
Right.
... whether it's diligence, whether it's market development, technical development,
or even capability development.
Yeah.
So, uh, there, there's grants there available.
Alongside that, there, just through our core service delivery, there's
opportunities to partner. We've done a lot of work, particularly with,
between the BSI and, uh, Taitakarau Māori
Collective on opportunities for tautura in Northland, regenerating
tautura. So there, there are opportunities as part of our core services
alongside, alongside, uh, specific funding, uh, grant
opportunities.
Mm. And, and what sort of figures are we talking about?
The WPGF is a $2 million program.
Okay. Nice. Thank you.
Candelas Pare.
Thank you. Um, just a final question from me on this.
Uh, I note that, um,
the, your Māori agribusiness programs have supported over 80
projects in the Māori food and fiber
sector through co-investment grant funding.
Once that has happened and is underway,
is there a, um, an opportunity for follow-up
to see how that funding, you know, how that, the success
of, of those projects after the funding has been
allocated and also opportunities to provide further
funding should it be required?
I'll answer the second part of your question first. The answer to that is yes.
Yeah.
And, and one of the things we often see is when a project goes successfully and an,
an entity makes progress in one particular area, it highlights other opportunities
for future growth-
Mm.
... and we're always open to working with those entities.
Yeah.
Often it's a really good way to go because there's, uh, an existing
relationship, uh, it's a trusted relationship if the thing has gone
well. Uh, in relation to the first part of your...
Sorry, the first part of your question was?
When, when funding has been allocated, I mean, there's-
Oh.
... follow-up to see if it's been-
So,
But how do you measure the success of that
project?
Um,
that's something we're continuing to refine.
Yeah.
So, uh, and I'll take you back to the start of the process.
One of the things we look at, before we support projects would be, is trying to get
an estimation of what it's actually going to do.
Yeah.
So is it going to raise productivity?
Um, is it going to reduce emissions?
Is it, ideally, is it going to do both?
Uh, and so that's an important part of that decision-making process.
Hm.
And so the answer to your question is yes, there is follow-up.
Uh, all projects finish with a closeout report.
Um,
but that's not the end.
Yeah. (laughs)
Uh, it's really important that these projects lead to action that, that
changes, uh, the way these Māori entities can
perform. So if we think back to Whangara-
Hm.
... where, uh, for the committee, there's a project, uh, just north of
Gisborne, where we work with them, uh, for them to prepare
not only a 100-year plan, but also to break it down to steps over the next
one, two, five, 10, 20 years. Uh, in the course of our
conversations with them, they're able to sit down, identify and show us the things
they have changed immediately.
Hm.
They were able to sh- they were able to show us the areas of, of their farming
practice they've retired, uh, and allowing to regenerate, um, native
bush. They showed us the wetlands they were preserved.
They showed us and told us about the increase in productivity, their bottom line in
year one as a result of the change of some of their farm practice.
So it's through the relationships we often get to know about the practical
things and benefits that happen immediately.
But yes, every project has a closeout report.
Yeah. Okay.
One, one, one thing, um, Chair, I wouldn't mind just mentioning on
this, um,
is we, we have, um, 753
commitments under treaty settlements that are live in our agency.
So it's a huge-
(laughs)
... uh, so each time these things are entered into, lots of commitments get made
between Crown and iwi.
Um, and it's been a really big job for us to get on top of that.
Um, uh, we- we're, we're pretty, we're feeling a little bit pleased with ourselves
'cause we've achieved 93% of those.
We were, we, we had quite a lot outstanding, but we put in this huge effort-
Hm.
... to try and lift our game.... and get that done because it's foundational to the
relationships with, with iwi where there's been a settlement.
Um, so we're one of the departments that has, because, uh, primary sector
assets are a big settlement o- option, we have a lot of
obligations. And of course, in the, the, you know, consideration of what happens
in, in the water and on the inshore and so on, um, we, we have
quite a significant engagement. So, so Glen and his team, uh, w-
along with my colleagues here, work really hard to try and make sure that we get
that done. So I think we've got 20 outstanding-
Hmm.
... uh, uh, things that we need to get done, uh, with every group.
So that's, that's, that's substantial for us.
But it's, it's a, a, probably people don't see that, you know, these settlements
all get entered into-
Mm-hmm.
... with lots of, um, things agreed to.
But, you know, for us, the culmination of that is 753, um,
things that we had to get done.
Mm-hmm.
It's good. Good, good to be in a place where we're actually nearly on top of it.
Yeah. What I'd like to add to Ray's answer actually, answers a little further your
question earlier about opportunity.
Um, one of the things with these treaty settlement commitments is it's really easy
to fall into an obligation space.
Yeah.
It might be to go meet an iwi that, me- meet them every year.
So we meet the commitment, we have the meeting.
What we've really focused on as an agency is trying to take those commitments and
turn them into a platform from obligation into opportunity.
Yeah.
So again, I'll give you a practical example.
Um, there was an board meeting with iwi in the Waikato called Ngāti Hau, which came
about
probably about two months ago. Uh, at that meeting, they brought to the table
some aspirations to expand a horticultural, uh,
venture that they have going on. They grow strawberries, early season strawberries,
and also to start a dairy platform.
So as a result of that engagement meeting the commitment, we were able to send some
of our people to see them in the month that followed, to sit down and start talking
about how we support them to move their dairy platform forward and to expand the
horticulture. So, it's a, that's a practical example of the-
Mm-hmm. ... answer I was giving before about how the treaty settlement connections can play
out.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Very good. Um, we'll move on now to-
(laughs)
... Director Ag, the Business and Service
section. There's quite a climb advocated for
this.
Mr. Chair, um, I'm wondering if I can have leave to
jump back to the organizational operations for one question at the start of this?
Yeah, you can.
Yep. Thank you. Um, Ray, it
was, um, regarding your involvement as a
health and safety, uh,
lead.
Yes.
Yeah. Which is a big responsibility and duty.
Um, and
I, I heard a very striking figure recently that, um,
a New Zealand worker is statistically significantly more likely
to get injured at work or to die at work-
Mm-hmm.
... than an Australian worker.
Yes.
And
how is it that we're in such a bad place in that
space? What are we doing wrong
and what do we need to do differently?
Yeah, it's a big question. Uh, yeah, look, um, my interest in this sort
of got piqued when I was in the corrections job.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, because a lot of, a lot of staff got hurt
and I didn't think enough was being done.
Y- you know, you're not going to avoid people getting hurt altogether there, but,
uh, there are many things you can do.
And there are also, you also have to think about how you look after people and you
can bring them back to work when, uh, uh, when there are
those types of problems. And that took me into the Government Health and Safety
Lead role at, um, Public Service Commission asked me to do that ac- across
government. And, uh, Vince actually, uh, funnily enough, he,
Vince took on the initial leadership of it.
So he and I sort of lead this, and we've got a very small team.
I see.
Um, what, what have we learned about all of this in relation to your question?
Um, New Zealand, New Zealand had a s-
I guess it goes to g- it's a cultural thing a bit.
Mm-hmm.
Um, you know, we're a bit inclined to get the ladders out on the weekend and get
off and do our thing. Um, it's a, it's a small country thing as well.
It's a bit of a pioneering thing. Uh, we, you know, I certainly
grew up, you know, my generation, you know, we were expected to kind of get on
and do stuff. Health and safety considerations weren't really a factor in
what we did.
So you gotta remember. So that's, that's sort of our history, right?
It's where we've come from. And, and I think it's been
quite the journey to get companies and businesses,
um... It's still a big challenge in farming practices where people are all
operating in a sort of more isolated fashion, and they're not part of big corporate
structures, um, that oversee what they do.
It's, it's, it's been a cultural thing for New Zealanders to come to terms with the
fact that it's not okay
to ask people to do things that put them in unsafe positions.
It's not okay that people can't put their hand up and say, "I'm
worried about the thing that you're asking me to do, or is there a better way to do
it?" And we've seen quite a sea change, um,
across companies. Uh, and certainly in the public sector where we've seen much
better performance and reduction in harm incidents, um,
as, uh, if you like, um, directors, um, whether, uh, they be
in the public or private sector or people with responsibilities, officers, um,
have taken a greater responsibility, um, to report, to
build plans, to engage with their staff, to have health and safety
representatives and committees that are engaged, uh, and
representing the issues of their workforce and trying to bring those, those
through to the fore. So I think we're still catching up.
Mm-hmm.
I just think we're still catching up. We are better.
We are vastly better than where we were, uh, if you
went, um, back 10, 15 years. Um, we
still have some work to do in this area, and I think it's largely
attitudinal. Um, all the resources are there.
All the learning is there. The law is there.
Um, it's, it's all much strengthened.
Um, I think, you know, WorkSafe
have had their ups and downs, but they, you know, they, they're in a fairly stable
position now. Uh, and I think we've just got to keep
encouraging people to-... to,
embrace safety. If you're running a workforce, one of
the best ways to attract people into your workforce is if people say that's a safe
place to go and work, that's a good place to go and work. They look after people.
They care about not just safety, but health, uh, and psychological health
as well, which has become a very, a much, a much bigger issue.
Um, so we aren't where the UK is, and we aren't quite as good as Australia.
We're also a bit more exposed. So if you think about New Zealand's in- industry
makeup, we're not heavy manufacturing
or big industrial complexes with large unionized
workforces. We, you know, we've done a lot in the primary sector.
Farming's a particular issue where, you know, uh,
p- people will make choices about how they choose to get around their farms and
what they choose to do. Uh, and the, and I know the agencies that work in
this area work incredibly hard to try and help farmers and-
(coughs) ... growers to take these things, uh, keep things safe.
And forestry is a big industry in New Zealand that, you know, it was in a very poor
state. It's in a better state. It's in a much better state.
They've taken it very seriously. So, I-
I- I think it's a really good question. I- I'm passionate about it.
We- we've, we've been on the improve. We've definitely seen a lift in our game.
I think we've still got a little ways to go.
And, uh, uh, and one of the things that I'm quite proud about is we, we
run, um... Vince does it for me, but we run
effectively... every year, we run a conference for the health and safety
representatives across the government sector.
We get about 400 to 500 people come to that.
We try for them to come together for a day, and we try to give them information and
resources and help and interesting speakers that put a bit of gas in their tank to
go back to the organization. Pretty hard job to do to be a health and safety
rep, to be the person that has to go to the bosses and say, "Excuse me,
but, you know, this is not safe, or we need to do something here or, you
know, we've got a better idea about how to get the job done," and to be listened
to. So we try to support those people to make sure that they, they
feel they can act, that they feel that they will be backed, uh, and that they will
be, they will be listened to. Um, and we give away awards as well
just to try and recognize. So we've tried to really lift, lift, lift the game in
the public sector, and we have seen some significant improvements.
And we sometimes forget, just the last thing on this, in the public sector, you
know, we have people that we either contract or that hop into helicopters
and, and fly around, which is probably the, the greatest risk, uh,
area, uh, that we are exposed to. We have, we have people
on farms and we've had people, our own, uh, animal welfare inspectors and people
exposed to serious incidents
on all the same things that farmers experience, that
sometimes notwithstanding the amount of training and effort that's gone in.
Um, uh, so, uh, we have people on ports.
Um, you know, ports, uh, are dangerous places-
Mm-hmm.
... to work and they need good h- health and safety, uh, systems.
We've got people in laboratories dealing with, um,
substances and things where there are risks.
So yeah, look, it's, it's, um... I think New Zealand's
in a much better place than it was. And, and the corporate people I talk to outside
of the pri- outside of the primary sector, but in the wider, um, business
sphere, um, they- they've taken these responsibilities pretty seriously.
I mean, if you go to any work site now, you're sometimes grown with the amount of
gear you have to put on and the amount of things you have to sign.
I just went through Auckland Airport extension to have a look at it.
Um, you know, it... the health and safety
regime they've got in place there, the company that's, that's building that was
pretty impressive. Rachel?
Yeah, just as- you've mentioned worker participation.
Yeah.
Um, um, thank you for acknowledging that because the research says that when
there's genuine-
Yeah.
... worker participation-
Mm-hmm.
... you have a lower injury rate.
Yep.
Obviously, that's quite straightforward in the public sector because,
you know, you have a strong union movement.
It's more so, right?
Yeah.
But with small businesses, particularly farms, do you see there's an
opportunity there
for greater genuine worker participation?
Probably if they're some of the farmers here.
Um, uh,
I think it's quite... I think it's, um, probably...
I think it's probably variable, you know, because-
Mm-hmm.
... you're right, I can think of some corporate farming enterprises
where I've been... I've seen visibly them
engaging their people in health and safety practices.
You know when you turn up to a place and the person is starting- telling
you about kind of what you need to be aware of here and so on, or when you turn
up to a place and you just kind of jump on here and off we go.
Yeah.
And you get both, right? I mean, I- I've certainly experienced both, and
um, I don't know if you, you agree, Mike, that's fair?
Yep, that would be pretty fair comment. Yep, absolutely.
And, and there are, there are... look, there are farmers and growers who
don't have staff or have, you know, who are incredibly careful about these things
and others that probably, you know, they've never...
perhaps they've never had an incident, so they probably don't think it'll happen.
I- I wonder... the final one for me would be, it seems to me, we've gone
a pretty softly, softly kind of educated
approach, and I wonder if there needs to be a greater level of enforcement
in things, because I lo- I feel like a lot of the
specific, um, workplace
challenges that we face do exist in other parts of the world.
Now here we have a more open air farming place-
Excuse me.
... less industrial, but a lot of those industrial-
No,
no. ... jobs are much dangerous than-
Expo- exposures.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
And so, um, I'm not sure that stacks up as a, as
a, um, explanation for why we've got such high
workplace injury and death rates. Um, and I...
my question really is,
do we need to go harder on some enforcement?
I, I think the enforcement is pretty strong.
Um, uh, the, uh, WorkSafe do take quite a lot of
prosecutions. Um, we've been, we've been exposed to it ourselves.
(laughs) Uh, we didn't agree with it, but we were exposed to it.
Um, so, um,-
(laughs)
No, I, I don't... I don't think...
Ask him quickly, quick questions.
I don't, I don't think you see a lot of it because often these things
are settled.... um, before, uh, in the
process of going through the prosecutorial system.
Um, with, uh, worker health and safety incidents, there's a real opportunity
to settle the matter, uh, on the way through.
And so I don't think there's a lot of publicity, and I wonder if that's...
W- One of the, one of the most important things is, um, to talk to people
about not just the bad things that happen, but the near misses.
And I think the thing we could all do better at is feeling able to
talk about the fact that, um, this could have happened.
You need to know we managed to avoid it without feeling a liability as though we
might be-
Mm-hmm. ... prosecuted for telling people that.
Yeah.
So I think we-
Yeah. ... I think we've got into this slightly awkward space where people worry that,
um, if they say too much, that they might expose themselves to
liability. In fact- in fact, they won't.
That's true. That's very true.
Yeah. Well, now, I- I was just going to make the comment, um, in terms of what you
said before, Ray, is I think we have come a long, long way.
Yeah.
As a sector 30 years ago, health and safety was not even a thing.
No.
And it's the fact that we actually spend a whole lot of time talking about it-
Mm-hmm.
... whether we like it or not, the fact we're talking about it means we're thinking
about it. And, um, you know, I- I think there's been, you know-
(brushes hair)
... ******** (clears throat) and all those sorts of things now, they're a bit- a
hell of a lot more careful about chemicals and all sorts of things.
Yes.
Um, so I- I think, I, well I do, I agree, we've come a long, long
way. Still probably got work to do.
Yeah.
Um, but yeah, I think the sector's done a good job.
Mm-hmm.
And I'm n-
And a bit generational probably.
Yep, absolutely.
Yeah.
(laughs)
I can test- testify to that probably.
Well, I don't know
I- I must-
You know.
It's- it's-
We- we're sort of creatures of what we grew up with.
That's right. Yeah.
Well, I always reckoned my father was my biggest health and safety risk at my farm,
so.
(laughs)
And I think a- a lot of my contemporaries would say that-
... and probably my children say I'm the biggest health and saf- but anyway.
(laughs)
Yep.
Um, Jo?
Thank you. Um, I just kind of want to jump back to, uh, your third party
revenues. So you mentioned you've got, you had the big increase in
the surplus and the, um, tr- traveler clearance levy.
Yeah, memorandum accounts, yep.
But I note there are some accounts that are still in deficit.
Yes.
So what's happening in that space to try and tidy up that deficit?
Yeah, no, that's-
And what are they, if you're able to tell us?
Yeah, they're in the food safety area predominantly.
So, um, there are kind of about 300 different
fees and expenses that we can charge out in that food safety area.
Um, and so, um, the food safety,
um, the- the challenge there is whether, uh, Vince can get a bit more efficiency
out of his operation in order to reduce, um, the cost
impact, uh, and/or whether we have to make any,
uh, ongoing adjustments to the fees, uh, to get them right.
I mean, one- one- one of the areas, uh, just to give an example, so how does this
manifest? Um, we started to run a
bit of a deficit, I think, um, when the meatworks were doing
less work. So we- we employ veterinarians as part of the process-
Yeah.
... to approve meat products. They go through, the vets
are there, the meatworks operate less shifts, we're still left with the cost of the
vet. We can't recover it from the meatworks, right?
So this is one example where volume shifts and so on can
be, um, can make quite a difference.
Uh, there might be some other areas you want to touch on?
Yeah. Um, a lot of it is demand driven.
So we- we also do a whole lot of what we call circuit verification,
so we verify over 2,000 firms. Uh, so that demand moves
up and down, but we have to sort of resource at a fairly flat level.
We're very focused on trying to deliver cost-efficient
services. We are a cost recovery, not a profit-making.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so the- the team are very focused.
We- we- we try as best we can to forecast
for industry what the likely costs are as.
So what the feedback we got from industry is- is- it's not so much the
adjustments as the uncertainty or the rapid adjustments.
What they really want is forecasts as best we can.
So we work very closely with the finance colleagues to be able to forecast forward
and give industry surety about the rate.
You know, and if we keep these memorandum accounts as close to
zero as possible, so as much coming in as going out, we're not trying
to build a surplus or a deficit.
On the- on the other side of the equation, interestingly though, if you built on
the volume thing, on the passenger levy, um, volumes-
volumes came or travelers came forward much faster than was ever forecast.
So we recovered much more, much more quickly.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
So this, the- the- the volume sensitivity is- is quite, is quite significant.
Mm-hmm.
So, but, um, a- a very good question, and takes wi-
there's quite a bit of effort. We have a full cost recovery team of about 17
people.
Right.
They're dedicated to trying to make sure we get this right.
Okay.
So you'll- you'll, we'll- we'll probably have more to talk about through the course
of the year as we look, either adjust fees up or down or, uh,
to change our practices to try and, to try and keep reducing the costs.
Yeah. Okay.
But some of them ge- get hard. That- that veterinarian one's-
Mm-hmm.
... difficult because, you know, we- we probably have to have a vet up in Wairoa.
Right? They're not gonna tr- we can't ply them in or travel them in easily.
And, you know, if AFFCO run shifts, uh, on a different pattern
than they were, we mightn't be able to recover all the cost.
Okay, thank you.
Steve.
Thank you.
Uh, yeah, thank you (clears throat) .
I've got a specific question around, um, sort of
value for money and performance to do with the
investment and development of the live export,
um-
(clears throat) Mm-hmm.
... policy. Live animal exports. So
I wonder what work has been done in the last
year on delivering that, uh,
government commitment and what the sort of cost of that work has been.
The answer that the minister gave on Monday was that
the work is completed.
Yes,
And it's sitting with cabinet.
Yes.
Um,
and I guess at this, that point it's a political decision whether it
proceeds.But what has been the investment for you
as an agency?
Uh, well-
As well, I don't know the exact cost, but, um,
uh, look, it was a substantive piece of work, um,
to construct a
policy that would, uh, lift us to what was re- often
referred to as a gold standard, um, the highest standard that we thought was
manageable, uh, for exporting animal, uh, animals
on boats. To be particular, we're talking about cows.
Um, uh, so yeah, a lot of time and effort had gone
into that, um, uh, to, to get it to a
point where ministers can consider the options in front of them.
So, yep, uh, plus we've consulted with it as well.
We've targeted con- uh, consultation both with the industry and the
SPCA to make s- on, you know, the on,
on, on measures of what the gold standard should look like,
um, particularly on, on the boats.
And how does the gold standard concept stack up with the work you've put into it
now? Do you think it's a credible concept
or?
Yes. Yep. And, and, um, you know, I think-
Thank you.
... I think the effort that's gone in is to...
Well, it's, it's been quite an interesting history, history with that,
um, prior to the close down. Um,
we, we always had, um, pretty strong standards on livestock
export. Um, then you'll remember there was the lots of the Gulf
livestock one.
Yep.
And then we asked Mike Heron to do a review for us, and he's, he came forward with
a range of suggestions to further strengthen, um, which were-
Yeah.
... largely supported by the industry as well. It wasn't really opposed.
And we lifted significantly, and we did see a gain in reduction in animal
welfare incidents, uh, on boats. You know, you can't get away from the fact
that if you're putting animals on a boat to China, it's 18 days, but in
that you're doing that, how can you minimize, um, uh, the
risk to, to animals? Um, and so we had got a long way with that.
And then so we picked up from that work, um, post the, um,
or once the government asked us to kind of take a look at what would gold standard
look like and how much further could you go.
And industry had a range of ideas about things that they thought,
um, the various regimes that could be put in place to, to further
strengthen. Uh, we had additional ideas that's being batted around.
So look, I think, I think we've got a very credible option, um,
but you know, at the end of the day, it's, it's the cabinet decide.
Okay. In terms of the value for money aspect of
it, I mean, we're, we're trying as a committee to evaluate, um, the bang
for buck that-
Yep.
... the country's getting out of the expenditure on this.
So can you give us some hard figures on what has been spent
on the whole export development?
Yeah, I don't know because, you know, it's, it's, it's a probably
relatively small group of staff that have been, had been dedicated to it for about
a year, I guess, working their way through with various industries and so on.
I think if you want, if you want to calculate the value for money, you'd have to
look at, um, what's the industry worth?
So if you start it up, I think when it-
(laughs)
. ... I think, I think at its peak it was about $350 million in export
earnings. Um, I don't, I think that was a peak, uh, by the way.
I don't think that's-
It's dropped off now, I think, isn't it?
Yeah. Well, it's, well, it's zero now because-
I mean obviously for us it's zero, but I think overall.
Yes, it dropped off worldwide. Yeah.
The industry's dropped off.
Yeah, yep.
And is there still interest? You've been to China recently.
Is there still interest in China for our, our animals?
Uh, yeah, look, they have raised it with me over time.
Um, but at the moment, uh, in China, I mean
costs of, costs of production for, for milk production there are quite high.
Yeah.
So, um, it's essentially because they're not
grass-fed. So you gotta, you gotta grow feed or import feed,
and so the cost of that has meant that, you know, production costs for them in,
in dairy proteins are, are much higher.
Um, which in a sense plays to our comparative advantage.
So yeah, I don't, uh, but different countries have different demands.
I mean, I know Indonesia have been very keen to supply milk, uh,
fresh milk to schools and to kids and so, you know, they,
they've, they've got an ongoing interest.
Yeah. So, um, I read a quote to the minister on Monday that, um,
ex-
explicitly from Indonesia saying that they were interested in our,
um, our high value-
Yeah.
... um, livestock. That's, uh, that's your understanding?
Mm-hmm. Well, I think they would be.
They, they're interested and they, they've been pressing this point with, um, a
range of countries, including Australia.
So, um, uh, that's part of a common
ask for Indonesia. Um, and we've been very clear that
there's currently, um, a ban on it.
What we have been doing is we've got a big cooperation program
with Indonesia, and we've had two visits, technical visits in the last
year, um, bringing their people over, looking at things
like genetics, animal health-
Awesome.
... um, animal feeding, to help them improve
the productivity, um, and animal health outcomes of
their, um, dairy herd and their livestock in, in
Indonesia. And that's part of a, part of our ongoing program.
But we've been very clear, um, uh, with the Indonesians
around where we are in terms of the, the livestock export.
But it's an ask they ask of all their trading partners.
Rachel-
I think you're right to say there's a bit of a dip in the cycle
though.
Yeah.
There is definitely a dip in the cycle in terms of, um, the demand to
Indonesia, yeah.
So, so my final sub is, um,
so in June '24, Minister Hoggard said, uh, officials were preparing
a discussion document that would be released by September
'24.
Yeah, took longer.
Doesn't it? Yeah. What, what is the reason for that substantial delay?
Yeah. And is that at your end?
Oh, uh, I think, um-... sort
of br- broadly speaking, we were trying to get this into the best
possible place we could. Yeah. So it just, it just took
longer.
But still on track from your point of view?
Well, well, we can't do much more.
Got you.
For me, so, um, in June this year, the Minister said to this
committee that the legislation would be coming soon.
Um, and I asked him about this again on Monday, and he
couldn't elaborate on that. Um, has the legislation actually
been drafted? Is that, uh, where is the legislation sitting
given that he said back in June that it was going to be soon?
It's got, it's gotta get through its next hurdle first.
Yeah. What's the next hurdle?
Cabinet.
Right.
It's with Cabinet.
And one further question, Chair. Thank you.
Um, in the past, the Minister also said that he wasn't going to be a ship
broker. Um, one of the, uh, one
of the issues that has been raised around the ability to
reinstate live export is the availability of ships that operate at a
standard.
Mm-hmm.
Um, has the, has the ministry been doing any work on identifying...
I under- I understand there's been some work identifying ships, but how's that
going? Is that, have you identified a number of ships that could be used?
Are they actually going to be commercially available to come into New
Zealand?
Yeah, look, look, um, we, we know the boats that do this.
Yep.
Um, uh, and, uh, we have a view, we have a view about the
boats that do this. Um, and that's all expressed.
So, uh, I mean, you know, absolutely, absolutely there's enough boats to be
able to do it, um, if, if you want to undertake the exercise.
Um, you just have to make sure that the standards can be, uh,
met. Um, so it's often less about the actual
ship and more about whether the standards that are
required can be met. And that'll take you back to the
state of the boat that you're talking about.
Do you think they'll want to come to New Zealand and operate out of New Zealand,
those ships?
Uh, well, it would depend on, yeah, you're saying,
uh, to meet the standard, does it just become too high?
Uh-
It's also a question around market, right?
Like is the, if there's a dropping number of ships, small number of ships actually
available to do the work-
Yeah.
... um, the, um,
obviously there's-
Yep,
right. ... the ships operate out of places like Australia already.
They do, yep.
So, uh, is the market going to meet the potential demand?
Yeah, well, I, I think it probably would.
Um, the, the, and the Australian, a number of them are
Australian-owned.
Mm-hmm.
So, they, their connections to New Zealand are quite strong.
They've operated here before for quite a long period.
Um, so I, I think, yeah, it'd be a calculation that, that would
have to be made, but, uh, I, I would think there'd be demand.
Can I have a supplement? Yeah,
yeah, we'll finish it off and then we'll go to a, a new primary.
So, so what you just said earlier implies that there are ships that you
regard as meeting the gold standard, and it's a case of how
they're operated. So, the, their physical condition
is, is consistent with what you call the gold
standard, um, which obviously-
Yeah.
... we're critical of the concept, but, um, but you, it's just
about the pace of how they're operated.
Can you give us the names of those ships that you believe meet the gold
standard?
Um, no. Um, no, so I mean, uh, obviously we're in a
process where this, this is before Cabinet.
So, I need to sort of draw a line there.
But what I can tell you, because all this information is publicly available about
the boats that have come to New Zealand that have, that have been used, um, it's,
it's not a secret.
Um, you, you can see, you can see some boats that were purposely
built for taking these animals, and you can see others that were
retrofitted. And in the retrofitted group, some of them are actually, were
actually good, um, boats as, as we operated, you know, when we were
operating the system. Um, and you can tell that from what happens to
animals on the trips. Uh, and then there are other boats that would, would be of
lesser quality. And so, you know, the big thing with this would be,
um, making, setting a standard, um, that everyone would have to
hit. Uh, and then, you know, I guess operators would have to figure out
whether, whether their boats hit that standard or whether they'd have to do things
to get to that standard.
Mm-hmm.
And then, then that would become a determination for them.
You don't really wanna, you don't really wanna pick a boat.
You wanna pick a standard.
Okay, right. Suze.
Um, oh, first of all, I want to re- reiterate and to your, your whole team
reiterate what Joe said earlier about thanking you for everything that you do.
That's been amazing. Um, I'm also, uh,
noted that you talked about the growing the economy and doubling export
receipts. And, um, I was just wondering about your role
in the regulatory framework. And in particular, I've got a couple of
samples coming from the mighty Rangitikei with King Country Pet Food again.
So I know they've been trying to get, um, kangaroo meal
imported since April 2023. We can
import, I understand, kangaroo meat, but not meal.
And they're still, I think it's not due to go to consultation until next
year to get the, what's it called, import, import health standard?
Import health standard.
Yeah. And so I just wondered, is that an expected timeframe or are we
working on closing those things down?
Because it is, when you talk about our export receipts, it is having an
impact on that. And also, there was something else they
were doing that, um... Oh, and
then what we, I mentioned it on Tuesday to you about the same business with their,
with their-
Oh, yeah.
... export of chicken.
Yeah, we've got an answer for that one.
You're all... Yeah. Oh, that's great.
Start there.
Yeah. So, so, uh, with respect to, um, getting access back into
China-
Yeah.
... uh, for the stuff with, um, chicken based in it.
So, um, uh, we'll be updating the,
um, uh, overseas market access requirements for that in the next couple
weeks. Um, but we need to work, um, there's some work the
Chinese need to do on their side in making
sure all the information is, is out to the ports and where
it needs to be for people who then process goods coming across the
border.
Right.
So, so-
So for a business that's exporting pet food to China that contains
chicken...... but, um-
My-
... heat-treated chicken, when does that mean that they can-
My advice is-
... possibly
(overlapping dialogue) ... and I'm sure they are, is them to stay close to my Market Access
Team. We can control our bit of the process.
Yes.
What we can't control is-
Is the other side.
... is, is the, is the-
Chine-
... the Chinese side.
But, um, our people work very closely, and we've got a team up in
Beijing, so the best thing is we'll press ahead in, in, at
our pit as quickly as possible, 'cause we realize, you know, the costs and
impacts on, that this has had on businesses.
Um, but the best thing is for them to stay tight with my guys, who I
think they have been talking to, um, around, um, when
then, uh, they're likely to be able to start exporting.
Okay. Thank you. That's great. But in going back to the import health standards,
what's the expected timeframe for something-
Yeah.
... for that to happen?
Um, right.
So, we're sort of three, two years and counting.
Yeah.
Like, two and a half years and counting.
I don't, uh, like, I don't want to be dismissive, but I can't imagine kangaroo
meals very high up our list of interesting things we want to do.
But, um, uh, so, why, why, why would, why would
that be? Um, I'm, I'm happy to go back and find out, for sure.
So, we never... Because of our biosecurity stuff-
Mm-hmm.
You know, because we-
But we can import kangaroo meat.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but, yep, yeah, but it'll, it'll, it'll, it'll depend
on... Yeah, you're talking about a surrendered product then, aren't you?
What are you talking
about? No, a dry, um, a meal.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, it'll be, it'll be the way, it'll be what
potentially it can carry with it that we have to kind of assess-
Right.
... as to whether there's a risk associated with it.
So-
Okay.
So, all of these import health standards are painful to anyone that wants to
import something, right? The reason they're painful is 'cause we don't wanna import
something like we did with the PSA.
Right. Hmm.
So, we go back to that. So, so when someone wants to import something, they want it
to come straight away. When they want us to keep something out, they
want it to be dealt with straight away.
Oh.
Once, once these things, if these things get in, and we haven't assessed them
properly, it can be really hard to, to remediate.
So, I, I don't know what the issues might be with that.
It could well be that it's such a small import
value relative to the vast list of things that people have asked us to do, whether
it's strawberry seeds or... You know, I, I had someone yesterday at, at the
business summit in Auckland sort of say, you know, "Why can't I get my strawberry
seeds in?" Why haven't you got an import health standard for strawberry seeds?
I don't know.
(clears throat)
Well, I guess we'll figure one out.
But
once you start digging into these, unfortunately,
uh, this, this material, whether it's plant or animal material,
the kind of diseases and things that they carry, uh, have to really
be figured out carefully, um, before you start introducing them into your food
chain. So, I'll find out about the kangaroo meal.
I don't know if it's just got lost in the system, or whether it's...
I suspect we probably don't think it's a very high priority.
Right. So, it's not a first in, first served thing.
It's like you just get bumped down the priority and if something else better,
bigger and better comes in first, after you.
It
might be something- There's a bit of bo- a bit of both.
Right. And then there was one other thing that I, I, I actually talked about last
year as well, is that sometimes the...
Well, these allegations that-
Mm.
... you guys shut down for three months over summer, and it's hard to get an
import license.
Really?
Yes.
(laughs)
So, eh, can you say-
Well- ... that that is not true? (laughs)
What's their reaction? (laughs)
Figs.
Well, probably c-
Although, in terms of
import- I think they'd like
to. (laughs) In terms of import, in terms of import licenses, so does the, does the process
operate 12 months of the year consistently?
Absolutely.
Right.
I mean, I mean, I mean, uh, boats continue to come-
Yeah.
... and take, uh, products, primary sector products every day of
the year. And so, our people will continue to issue export certificates all
the way through. It, it, it, it's, no, that's nonsense.
Um, so, um,
of, of course, of course, I mean, you know,
on Christmas Day-
No, fair enough.
... people... No, no.
(laughs)
No, you've started me on this now.
I have to defend my position. Yeah.
Don't, don't understand it how-
I, okay, if, if you're flying on Christmas Day internationally, I'll have
biosecurity people rostered on doing their job.
Yeah.
Yeah. Hmm.
Um, last year with the fruit fly thing, all of us were online, and people
were activated in the middle of their Christmas holidays and came back to work.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and the core things that we just have to... There will be vets in meat works.
Yeah.
Um, there will be animal welfare people going to various disasters that they
encounter-
Mm-hmm.
... and so on. So,
we don't close down s- um... Uh, of course
that Christmas/New Year period, we try to get our people
away, like everyone else does. Um, so then, there, you know, you would expect in
that January period,
if you're trying to get information about something, it might be a little, a little
harder, but-
Yeah.
... I, I... Yeah. If, if people have got a c-
con- I'm just thinking the pet food folks or anyone else that's got a worry about
that, feel free to flick it through and, and then we can follow it through-
Yep.
... and just help out. 'Cause I, I know you'll...
I think these are quite common, what you're raising at.
Yeah. No, that, that's why I di-
They're
not unusual. And I ga- gave an example, but it's, it's possible-
No, no, not unusual. I don't know, I don't wanna make them out to be unusual.
Uh, because I, I, I get them as well, you know, when people say, "Well, I can't
really do this, and-"
Yeah.
"... I've been trying for two years to get someone to look at this." And I'll go
back and say, "What's going on with these strawberry seeds?" Um, and
there'll be an answer. Or, you know, we might need to raffle the lot
up. Happy to.
Thank you.
We'll be, we'll be at work, promise.
(laughs)
Put it on the website. (overlapping dialogue) Right.
We're, um-
Right. ... gonna take a, a break now. To the cast, so, so
freshen up. Greg can have a few drinks of water and then
(overlapping dialogue) (laughing)
10 minutes.
Boys, it's harsh in here, eh?
Yeah.
Harsh.
So, we're gonna, uh, move on to, uh, the animal welfare
subject.
And, um, I know Rachel has a question.
Thanks, Jeff. Um, thanks, team. We've touched quite a bit on, um, live
export already but, um, so I'm quite keen to get into another topic.
Sure.
And I can see John's, um, foreshadowing where I'm going.
(laughing) My apologies. I thought that was a strategy.
It was over his head. (laughs)
Um,
so look, I don't want to, um, dig in a bit around, um, the science
summary.
Yes.
And it came up in conversation-
Mm-hmm.
... at the end of the week and understand you were one of the authors of
that. There has been quite a lot of criticism from the community about that
paper. Um, so I, I might just run through a few of
those and get your responses. So-...
starting, um, a starting point, I guess, is that NAWAC obviously
pr- produced its FEA report in 2023.
Since that time, um, and when you consider the
summary, there were no further pieces of research included from
'25, I think one from 2019. So, I guess my
question I put to you is, why did MPI feel the need
to, I guess, redo NAWAC's work when there hadn't
actually been a significant change in the science?
Um, because NAWAC provides a really important independent
role, and I think the concern from the sector is, well,
what is the point of NAWAC if MPI's going to
override that work, uh, especially if there
hasn't been any significant shift in science?
So that's my first, uh, questioning, and just, um, signaling to the chair that I
will have some follow-up questions on this matter.
Oh, no worries. That's a great question, and thank you, and, and look, thanks for
the opportunity because I think there has been a lot of talk and, uh, about this
outside. Before I answer the questions, there are a couple of things I would like
to touch on though. Um, some of the narrative around
this is suggesting that I have been dismissive of animal welfare science.
Mm-hmm.
I, I would like to be on the record as saying that is absolutely not the case.
I have published papers in animal welfare myself.
A number of the commentators, um, that have been reported on have been
collaborators of mine on animal welfare papers.
Some of them have never worked with pigs, but they've, they've got like, um,
everybody, they've got an opinion on this. So I just wanna be, wanna be clear.
I'm not criticizing animal welfare science.
And when I made the statement that animal welfare is a human
construct, that was not meant to in any way undermine animal
welfare science, but animal welfare is a human construct.
I, I, we all want to look after animals, but I will have a
different view of what good animal welfare is to what Miss Luxon will,
what, um, Mr. Butterick will. Um, and so that is, that is the
thing is what is good versus what is bad will be humans.
Yes.
Yep. Um, so to an- to answer your question, we didn't repeat
NAWAC's work, and I really do appreciate you calling it a science summary
'cause that's exactly what it was.
It was never intended to be a science review as it's been portrayed.
And so, um, you know, a number of the comments about what I did and didn't do or
what the team did and didn't do are, are actually not appropriate 'cause we
didn't undertake any science review.
As you said, NAWAC had already do it, did it.
Uh, the Pork New Zealand had already done it, and the minister
was left with, um, wildly different
perspectives on the back of seemingly credible
reviews. And so as I often do within the ministry, I'm asked
to actually look at these and see what, what is the
correct perspective here. So that's, that's the reason.
Yeah.
We didn't redo NAWAC's work.
Well, so I've got some more questions.
So, just off the back of that, I guess, your, your comment around, um,
animal welfare being, I guess, you know, a human construct, I appreciate that
on many matters people will have different points of view.
But I guess in this situation, we are dealing with (bleeps) and so,
actually, the High Court has also found, um, made
findings. And I mean, one of the findings they've made is around economic concerns
not being able to override animal welfare.
The minister on Monday made a lot of comments about how he also
considered economic concerns. And so, I guess, my
question to, this might be more of a question to Ray because it's probably, you
know, sits higher than, um, than your role, which is to look at the
science. Um,
I guess, you know, where does MPI...
Is MPI, I guess, under some,
uh, uh, a challenging circumstance when you have
the High Court actually stating that economic conditions
can't override animal welfare concerns.
But we actually have a minister wanting advice and making decisions based on this.
And I wanna, I wanna take care not to (bleeps)
because these are ministerial decisions.
So, but,
you know, the, the... Do you think that we're potentially locking in a, in a
problem here where that High Court ruling could actually still
apply if it becomes clear that the minister has made
decisions around legislation that actually look
at economic conditions as opposed to the animal welfare
consideration?
So, the, the act
doesn't... You're, you're quite right.
The act says, doesn't say that economics can
override, um, animal welfare decisions in the main purpose of the act.
But it is one of the, the, the things that can be taken into
account when looking at things like the
transition period, um, to a, a, a
new regime and the prac- uh, alongside
practicality. Um, so, so the
purpose of the act is about, um, uh,
uh, looking after the animal welfare for, uh, free from
pain and behavior. Um, but when, when
actually looking at how you implement things,
practicality and economics are things that can be taken into
consideration, but they're, they're, they're not, um,
overriding, um, uh, impacts.
Uh, the pigs area, as, as, as you are well
aware, is, is extremely, um,
fought and there's people with
really, um, uh, divergent views. And I
think just to reiterate what, um, John
said, uh, the minister came in after there'd been quite a bit of
water under the bridge, um, uh, on this
issue. The science, I think, review was actually decided...
The, the assessment was done in 2021.
I know NAWAC's advice was '23, but they did the science in
about 2021 to inform their advice and their
consultation. Um, so I, I think,
the, the challenge for the minister has...
Coming in, as John has said, is, um, you had some very
strong views-
... um, and, and they were quite wide apart.
Um, so the process he has asked MPI to go through, and
in particular John, as to try to work through those
bits that were far apart, and try and work through
what's the way through the middle.
And so, uh, that's the process I think MPI has been doing
for the minister post that, that
NAWAC, um-
(coughs) ... 2003 advice. And,
um, there's been a couple of
iterations, um, on that. And he's asked, um, us
to go back a couple of times to the porker industry
when
it's not been entirely clear why they've had different views.
And he's wanted us to dig, really understand, to really understand
the nuts and bolts of why they've had problems with some areas.
And he's also gone back to NAWAC and asked their
view of where he's, he's landing. So, he- he's
trying to land something that sorta tries to
reconcile the different views that he was presented with when he came into
office.
Mr. Chair, I, I want to, uh, just dig into the science a little bit.
Because, um, uh, one of the,
um,
o- one of the studies that was, um, quoted in the science summary
was, um, Averos et al from 2010. And this is about the K value.
Yes.
And-
Well, well familiar with it then (laughs) .
Yes, yes. Um, I mean, I've seen some, um,
analysis of that. And I appreciate this may not have come through to the
ministry and, um, and I'll see if I actually can find a way for that to
happen. But essentially, that, um, Averos
actually showed that there was a clear behavioral threshold at
a 0.039. Whereas your
summary of that, um, shows that there's
no, uh,
evidence of improved animal welfare above a 0.028
K value. So, you'll be familiar with this.
Yes.
Um,
and that actually, there's some scientific
and statistical, you know, challenges in terms of how you've
improved, um, um, uh, interpreted that.
And one of those is that
actually the, I don't believe you had access to the raw data that-
That's true.
... Averos had. So-
So, um, whereas it does say in the summary things like, "We
plotted and the raw data confirm." But you didn't actually have the raw data, so
I'm just interested at that as a particular piece that people have
raised in terms of their concern around the summary actually reflecting
what the study actually showed. So,
quite interested in your response to that.
Yeah, look, that, and it's, and it's, um, I suppose a lesson to me in, in this
entire process was you should make things simple enough to understand,
but no more simple. And this, this is really complicated.
Mm-hmm.
The K value is really complicated.
We spent a lot of time, uh, speaking with some of my legal colleagues and my policy
colleagues trying to explain the, uh, the re- the regression
and what it does and doesn't mean. So I, look, I'd be equally critical of the same
person that's criticized us, because, uh, they are
suggesting that we blindly believe a, um,
a statistical model and not look at the raw data.
So we didn't have, um, Averos' raw data, as in we didn't have it in the
spreadsheet. Averos presented their raw data in the paper, so it is
actually there to, to look at. Uh, so that's not true.
There's a f- a bit of semantics as to what does the word analyze mean versus
to a statistician versus to an English-speaking person.
(laughs)
But leaving that aside-
... um, the, the, the statistical model, um, and there are challenges with this.
If you, you, if you bear with me, Mr.
Chair, I did, I, I did, um, anticipate-
Right.
... um, this-
(laughs)
... this particular question.
Mm-hmm.
And if it's okay-
Yeah.
... I've got, um,
I, I've, if you can-
Oh. ... pass that down, Mr. Abel.
Yeah.
Uh, well, actually I have a, I have a whole pile of them, so we can-
We can-
... we can pass them around.
We can look at them, that's great. Yeah.
So Averos', Averos' paper is the paper at the back, and I've just
extracted the, the graph at the front.
So again, one thing I wanna clear up, this is an excellent paper.
It was suggested that I was dismissing this paper. That is not true at all.
One of the reasons why we focused on this paper-
Mm-hmm.
... is because it's a meta-analysis.
So one of the challenges when I stepped in to look at the evidence that was
provided to the minister is-
(laughs) ... that there is a, a catalog of papers that says,
um, "If you do this, this goes up if you...
Whereas, if you do this, it goes down." There was no consistency.
The beauty of a meta- meta-analysis is what it does is it brings a whole pile of
papers together that can be combined.
In this case, I think there was a 20 or 22 papers.
Um, and it plots what's the average response throughout.
Excellent paper. Well done. No disagreement with the statistic
whatsoever. It's the interpretation from the statistics that I
would disagree with.
That's nice, yeah. That's good.
And, and the reason for that is if you look at that, if you look at the...
Well, you can look at the table or you can look at the regression.
They've, they've taken a, um, a broken, what we call a broken stick
regression. So you've got a threshold at which
animal welfare, lying behavior as a measure of animal welfare-
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. ... decreases. They've, they've, they've, um,
identified a threshold. But that threshold is defined by a
regression line. And regression lines are deeply
impacted by extreme values. So if you look at the downward
curve there, that is s- that i- that
is, A, generated by very few points.
You can see the points are scattered around it.
Um, and B, it's, it's, um, directed by
its most extreme values, which means the intercept of the two
lines is also directed by those most extreme values.
So what I've tried to do in that front page is to show you that,
um, and he- and that is the reason for the advice that I gave the minister,
is you have the same percentage of pigs lying as the measure of
welfare all the way through to
0.028. And it's not until you get to at least
0.03... that you see any dot
of lower lying behavior. So, although the stat- statistical
model picks 0.039, that's because it is a low-
a low, a line drawn
perfectly appropriately from a statistical point of view, not disagreeing with the
scientists, but it is a plotted function, and the
intercept is generated from that.
So, no scientist should ever believe a
statistical model and not look at their raw data.
And that's where I would take issue with the im- statistician that has provided
that advice.
Mm.
Models are to be used, not believed.
Mm-hmm.
Or all models are wrong, but some are useful.
They're the statistical thoughts we are always brought up with as scientists.
Oh, see.
I've got- I've got one more question-
This reminds
... and then, and then this might-
... stats at university.
(laughs) (laughs)
Um, and, and I know Steve's got some questions.
So-
Carry on.
And this one's probably more for Ray.
Um,
did, did the department advise the minister that they should
consult with SPCA or other animal
welfare organizations in developing the
legislation? Because there's been a lot of commentary around that.
Uh, you know, I've made commentary around, around that, so has the
SPCA. And I'm just quite interested if there was
any advice provided to the minister that he should consult with more
than just the pork industry.
I don't, I don't know if there was any, uh, formal advice on that.
Uh, I, I don't recall. Um, what I,
well, I think what I do recall is essentially the commentary that he
made that I think, I think he felt fairly clear
on the positions, uh, that the SPC and others had taken
on the matter. I think that ex- been expressed probably in a range of
ways. Whereas I think, I think in
order to get to the conclusion here, what was less
clear was the positioning of the pork industry and, and kind of what might
be practically possible or doable.
I think, I think that was kind of
my understanding of it.
He, he, he, he consulted those that were most affected, which were
the, the, the people that were gonna have to implement it.
Industry.
Industry. And, um, obviously there were discussions with NAWAC as well, as his
advisors.
Hm. But I guess can appreciate why
probably a broader range of stakeholders being consulted would've been helpful
in order to get to a position that had more, you know, s-
buy-in rather than the very polarized view.
Well, the SPCA are represented on NAWAC.
Mm-hmm.
And the minister did actually consult with NAWAC, having received this
advice. So
I mean, he, he has technically consulted
with NAWAC.
Yeah. No, no. I mean, I think, I think this, this, this is, this, this has been a,
you know, pretty challenging because this issue's been through a number of
ministers' hands.
Mm-hmm.
In my time-
Yep. ... in my time here.
Yes. (laughs)
(laughs) So, and I think all ministers concerned have found this-
Mm-hmm.
... a very challenging area where it's hard to get
agreement, uh, on a way forward. So, I mean,
what, what I have seen is quite a bit of movement, uh,
on the industry side of things, uh, to try and find
ways, um, to reduce, to reduce the impact on animals
without increasing the mortality of piglets.
And I think that's, that's quite an important dimension as you work your
way through, as you work your way through this.
That's often not sort of talked about.
(laughs)
We talk about it a lot.
Yeah.
(laughs) Um,
can I go back to sort of a first principle thing, in your comment
about animal welfare being a human
construct, John? Do you believe animal
suffering is a human construct?
A- a- abso- Uh, no, obviously not. Um, and sorry, I should qualify
that, Mr. Abel.
Yeah.
Um, there was a criticism, I, sorry, where I started with that, I'm not sure if
you-
... you were in at the time.
Yeah.
Was that I'd been, uh, that it was, I,
um, the representation was that I was being dismissive of animal welfare
science by making that statement.
Right.
If you read through that passage where I've written it, it is actually to,
um, highlight that we need to deal with the quantitative evidence
as we make these decisions. Because a whole pile of submissions will have come in
from people that absolutely don't believe, you know, that pigs have enough space
or that farrowing crates are right, but they don't understand the
science. They, they are basing that on their own values.
Uh-
Okay, but, uh, let's agree that we need to, uh, take an
evidence-based decision-
Absolutely.
... and a somewhat dispassionate one, um, that actually
looks at
independent assessments of the impact on the animals.
And to your point about, you know, the, uh, uh, th- uh, the comment I've heard
made is the consultation with the people most affected
by this decision.
Mm-hmm.
Um, really the question is a
consultation with the animals most affected by this decision
because it's an animal welfare question we're grappling with.
Yes.
Animals can't speak for themselves.
So, you need
independent animal welfare experts to advise us
what the experience of the animal is
because we can't ask them directly.
And-
Yeah, there are-
Yeah.
... many people who-
No.
... have that expertise and who, who, and there's a, there's quite a broad
base of science around how we understand what the experience of a
sentient animal is-
Right, right.
... in certain conditions.
Absolutely.
So, and I think this is where our challenge is, is that in the past year-
Yeah.
... it appears that, um,
the ministry and the minister have heavily focused on consultation with the
New Zealand pork industry. And basically, in the words
of SPCA,
blindsided them with consultation.
And I'll give one-
Hm.
... uh, specific example.
Interruptions studies.
One specific example. Well, okay, I'll, I- I'll give you a couple questions
then.Um,
in your option one and two for farrowing
crates-
Option one.
... uh, option one being, um, that we get rid of
farrowing crates. Option two, which is the one the minister has chosen on your
recommendation, is, uh, the temporary crating in
10 years time.
(clears throat)
One of the arguments for that, the economic arguments, was that it, it would
bring a significant economic burden in terms of capital
costs for farmers to rebuild infrastructure.
For a 350 sow farm, that was estimated to
be a capital cost of approximately $507,000 for
option two, which is what the minister's gone for.
For option one, for the 350 sow farm, it would be
$595,000. So the difference in those two figures is
17%, or $88,000.
My question is, because in the overall economic impact, it's actually
the, the weaner and the grower pig stall space which is the biggest
economic impact in terms of NAWAC's
recommendations. Why is it that the ministry
recommended
that we stay locked into this farrowing crate system
indefinitely
when, for a nominal increase in capital cost
and taking into account there may be more land needed, um, and
there may be somewhat more piglet mortality, though that is clearly
contested, um, that the ministry
didn't move away from farrowing crates or recommend moving away from
farrowing crates-
(coughs)
... when that would solve
the bulk of the problem and address the findings of the high court
in 2020?
I could take a first crack at that.
Oh, sure. I, I, I have no, I had no input into the economic analysis so I, I can't feed
back into that. Um, but that wasn't why we offered the
option of, of two. Two was all about managing the
balance between the, the piglet welfare and the
sow welfare. Um,
and, and what we were, uh, as we-
(coughs)
... moved through the science,
what we concluded was that we could
actually utilize farrowing crates, uh, for a short
period after farrowing, uh, and the animal was able to do the vast majority
of its natural behaviors, which is to stand up, lie down, stand up, switch
sides, lie down, which they can do. That is the vast majority.
If you look at the behavioral accounting of an- of sows post-farrowing, that's what
they do for much more than four days.
But piglet survival is not improved by a, a sow in
a farrowing crate beyond four days. So hence the reason for the four days.
NAWAC actually agreed with that when the minister reconsulted with
them. They disagreed with pre-farrowing.
That's all right.
I guess that's the cruelest bit of it, is when the, the, the s- the mother pig
wants to build a nest-
Yes. ... in the 48 to 24 hours before giving birth-
Yep.
... and is stuck in a cage where they can't turn around.
The, the, the sow can do most of the
behaviors associated with nesting as long as she's provided the
materials to do it. And science is quite clear on that.
So again, this, this is where we come to this judgment as to whether they
can do enough
or not.
Yeah.
And that's, that is the judgment call.
But the science literature is very clear, a sow can undertake the
vast majority of the behaviors associated with building a nest in
a farrowing crate as long as she's given deformable, deformable and
manipulable materials.
Can I step back to a bigger question?
Okay.
I guess we just sort of order of recommendations of MPI.
We have a, a very clear high court ruling in 2020.
We have a very low level of public tolerance for mother
pigs in cages, whether it's sow stalls, mating cages, or
farrowing crates. And-
We agree on that.
There is-
(laughs) Thank you.
Sorry?
It's okay.
And
s- there is a clear solution here which you have actually presented to the minister
of an option, which is the-
NAWAC solution, which is that we move away to phasing out
farrowing.
And the cost differential in the re- regulatory impact statement
is 17% difference to phase out farrowing
crates entirely, thereby solving
the major problem with the high court finding, meeting our Animal Welfare
Act without having to do a workaround by pa- passing some primary legislation
as we're, uh, in the process of doing.
Why did MPI not recommend that we
bite the bullet and take option two, solve this problem
of pigs in cages for the public good, for the welfare of the
animals?
Uh, and that's the capital cost differential.
Yeah.
The cost also includes the operational costs, so the-
Yes.
... reduction in income as a result of-
Which is somewhat-
Increasing
fatality. ... overestimated by some est- estimations because of the high rate of mortality
you predicted, about 19 piglets.
Yeah.
So-
So in terms of the d- the development of that economic analysis-
Yeah.
... um, we used or-
coughs
) Or Superag used input from John, Dr.
John Hallstrom, um, who provided some, some guidance
around, uh,
around some of the production issues.
So th- on that basis, uh, the, the operational
losses or the differential in operational returns,
um, were the, were the key factor.
So it's purely an economic determination at that point, not taking into account
public sentiment, um, animal, independent animal welfare
advice from NAWAC, who clearly preferred to get rid of the farrowing crates, or the
high court finding, that it was against our Animal Welfare Act?
Mm-hmm. The, the high court finding was that the way farrowing crates had
been used with the 30 days-
Mm-hmm.
... um, uh,
s- against the Animal Welfare Act.
The work we were doing with our scientists was to identify whether
there was an ability for the use of farrowing, farrowing
crates of any sort to be-
... able to be, to meet the requirements of the Animal Welfare Act.
And we believe that the balance that we've struck does do that
and then the economic analysis around the impact of one
option or the other, um, features, featured in our,
in our recommendation.
Can I-
Right, um-
Yeah.
Rachel?
Yeah, so can I just come
And then we're gonna move on to, um, biosecurity.
Yeah. I've just got-
One more after that, Minister Chair.
Yeah. I've just got a question coming back to, um, the nesting behavior before
birth, um, in crates. Um, because you seem confident
that
they can perform, you said most-
Most.
Um, so I've got two parts to my question.
The first is, SPCA have been clear that actually mother pigs can't because they
can't move around, um, and
so it's, what do you say in response to that in terms of their
scientists? And secondly, uh, what, if you say it's only
most, what tasks can't they perform in that time when they're in
a crate, um, um, pre-birth?
Uh, so it's probably a num- number of other, turning around is one of them.
Um, they can't go and seek materials-
Yeah.
... because the materials are provided to them.
Um,
and, um,
yeah, I mean the other, the other thing I suppose that needs to be
taken into account in this is, uh,
we, we know that if we move any animal close to giving
birth, we increase the stress on that animal and we
likely create worse wealthca- welfare outcomes.
So if we, if we agree that we can have a sow in a farrowing
crate for four days to protect piglet, piglet welfare
after farrowing, it would be very disruptive to the birth
process to have her in a pen beforehand, move her into a
farrowing crate as she farrows to allow that to happen.
So
my, my ass- my assessment and my recommendation had nothing to do with the
economics. It was trying to balance that welfare of the sow versus the
welfare of the piglets. That was the, the recommendation we came up with.
So the main, the main things they can't do is they, they can't turn around
obviously, and they can't walk and seek, um, materials but the materials
are provided to them. And again, there will be
different views here, I'm not disputing that and I'm not suggesting that I'm right
and they're wrong necessarily, but what the science is really
clear, um, because I've looked through this in detail,
is most of the nesting behaviors and
the, um, the
farrowing advantages, so we know that when sows are allowed to
nest the duration of parturition is shorter, the,
um, dur- the duration of parturition in between each piglet is
shorter, so the entire process is shorter and therefore more piglets
survive. We, we have seen or the, the evidence is
there that, um, when they're provided nesting materials in farrowing
pens they have that, compared with not being provided with the nesting materials.
I've just got a follow-up question around the provision, um, materials because this
is something that came up during the select committee process.
Is N- MPI going to actually give directive (?)
(27:26) sacks being provided
rather than, you know, materials that are
more, you know, better for, um, sow welfare
like hay and things. You know-
Yes.
... is there going to be a strong directive, uh, through regulation or some other
form from MPI in terms of what is an acceptable nesting
material?
Um, so we will, so acceptable nesting materials, uh, will be
deformable, manipulable and they would be a part of the code as opposed to the
regulation. Um, we are not going to prescribe what
farmers should have because, um, each farm will be different and will have
different, um, abilities to access these types of materials.
The ones that have been most touted are, uh, hay, uh straw, sorry, not
hay. That's okay, yeah.
Straw, not hay.
Okay. Yeah.
Um-
And-
Paper, shredded paper.
Yeah.
Um, sawdust and yes, hessian sacks have been evaluated as
well. And, and a number of the behaviors can be, and in fact when that's
combined with some of the other deformable material, the pigs use
both. So.
Yeah. A very specific
question, um, on, on maternity cages.
Um, you explicitly advised the
Minister to put in place, the, the
maternity cages would have the three-hour restriction to come into effect by the
1st of July 2026. And you also said, "Provide the
New Zealand Pork copy of the code that you intend to issue in confidence and seek
their feedback whether it is realistic for the members to meet the, the
requirements set out by the code by the 1st of July 2026." Um,
NZ Pork had previously indicated that they could meet that requirement because it
didn't require any new infrastructure, it was a practice issue.
How is it that that date of 1 September
2026 has now become a 10-year delay
on changing the practice around mating stalls?
Mating stalls, yeah. Um, so it was a,
the Minister made a decision that the, the full suite of changes would
be, um, would be introduced, uh, collectively
so that-
Against your advice essentially.
It was a decision that he took to Cabinet, um, and so Cabinet have made the
decision that they've made, um-
Yep.
Yeah.
Right. Thank you.
Um, right. We're moving onto biosecurity
portfolio. Um,
really interested in
the, for example, the avian flu
outbreak and costs associated with that.
And how do you know you get value for money because obviously you contract out
some work,
uh, in that space where, uh, you're getting rid of, um,
infected material et cetera, et cetera.
So how, how, how do you know you get value
from
those contracts?
Um,
well-
... ge- generally speaking, um,
I, I think, I think, and Stewart can correct me if I'm wrong, but with,
there are a few, few things we had to do,
um, which are common in
a clean up exercise after you have tried to rid a disease.
So, you have to clean the facility, you have to remove all the litter, you have to
take all of that stuff out. And, in this case, we wanted to
securely, uh, bio-securically dispose
of the chicken.
And so, um, you don't have a lot of options and
choices actually. Um,
we certainly don't. We don't retain people to do all of that, although we will
oversee some of it.
Yeah.
Um, with the bio-secure disposal,
um, the trucks, uh, a company was employed.
They, we had to put special liners in the truck.
They had to do a whole range of special things to be able to get that stuff down,
down to Southland fair, um, to get rid of that, that, that material to
the, um, biohazard, um,
landfill. So that, there were sort of limited choices in
that. Um, on the clean up side, I'm pretty sure we used the
contractors that Mainland, Mainland, yeah, mixed...
Yeah, so a mix of the ones that they were used to using and, and others that we get
to, we get to bring in. So...
So, um, just following up then. I'm quite
interested 'cause, um,
obviously, uh,
you want to tidy up the
issue-
Yeah.
... because you don't want it reappearing.
But, um,
when you offer the contracts out, do, do you have, uh,
two or three or four, um,
people that, or, or companies that might, uh,
apply? Or how, how do you know that, um, you're
getting value out of those, um, contracts for
offers? Um, yeah. So, so as Ray said, as Ray said, we had
a mix. So, so we did use... So obviously our staff
used Mainland staff in the whole, in the whole operation as well.
Mm-hmm.
And some of Mainland's contractors who work at that farm
routinely. Uh, in terms of the suppliers that we
engaged, um, the main, the main supplier that we use
to, to, to oversee particularly all their cleaning and
decontamination and disposal work, um, is
one of our, one of our panel providers.
So, so yeah, so, so what, what we have is, uh, we
have, we have panels of providers that we pull together to help us
with response work. And so we go through a, we go through
a full procurement process in selecting those providers to form
a part of the panel, uh, so that when we do have a biosecurity
response, uh, we, we select from that
panel. Part of that process of forming that panel is we look at all
those things, at their capability, their expertise, their rates.
Uh, we agree rate cards with them in terms of what's appropriate to charge and
benchmark that against, uh, industry practice on, on
health and safety and all those sorts of things.
Yeah. Jo, you got a follow-up question?
Primary now.
Oh, primary.
'Cause I've got lots of primaries.
I've got a primary as well.
Righty-ho. Um, we'll move on to, uh, Jo.
Thank you. Um, okay. Um, I wanted to,
um... I'll start off with the hornets.
Um, and, uh, Ray, you mentioned
earlier, you know, the, the, the million dollars, um, that's
been spent roughly sort of so far in the continued expense of
that, and that you kind of have to...
I mean, you found 31 queens, and,
um, I guess you have to continually assess, uh, the
more you find, then you'll have to, to look into your options,
right? So,
do you think
that, or at what point-
Mm-hmm.
... do you decide, actually, we can't pull this
back. We're not going to be, we're just going to have to go to management or-
Mm-hmm.
... something like that? Um, and whilst it costs a
lot to do the work that you're doing
currently, when the time, or sorry, if the time
should come-
Mm-hmm.
... that you can no longer just do what you're doing now and you have to look to
more of a management phase-
Mm-hmm.
... has there been any analysis of the potential cost impact of
not continuing to try and eradicate?
Yeah, pro- pretty c- I mean, just a couple things on that.
Um,
we're... You know, we, we're nowhere close to even making those sort of choices.
Yeah.
So, at, at the moment, um, from what we know from the experts who've engaged in
this, it's, touch wood, right-
Mm-hmm.
... it seems to be playing out as the experts would
advise.
Okay.
Which is to say that, um, a nest has been
formed. We come into the new season.
Queens are, are beginning to leave their nest and, and, and, and
go further. So we probably, you know, this, the, the original in- uh,
infestation might have been sort of, I don't know, this time last
year, um, or towards the end of last summer.
It's kind of over-wintered. Now they're spreading out.
The, the science is largely that they don't go far from the
originating source. So eventually, over time, if you do nothing, they'll
spread further and further. But, and so that's consistent
with, um-
Mm-hmm.
... what we're seeing. So we've had four and a half thousand notifications from
right across the country. Um, I don't know how many people have told me they've
caught a hornet, um, in different parts of the country.
They're not hornets.
Mm-hmm.
They're usually some form of wasp
or bee. Um, all of the positive identifications have been
exactly as has been predicted, which are in that Glenfield, Beacon Head area.
So the, so it does-
(laughs)
... it does seem as though, um, it's
recent, relatively recent, and it's playing out
how you'd expect it to play out. (clears throat) So that gives us reasonable
confidence that we might be able to get to
this-... might, might be able to keep this, right?
Because everything we found out of the four and a half thousand notifications
has been within sort of about a kilometer of each other. Right?
So it's all pr- it's all pretty tight.
We've now gone out to a 5K radius, which is more, more
than I think even the sort of science, um, would technically say we need to do.
But it looks sensible when you look at it on the map as a buffer zone to try and
see if we can get... Now if we can, you know, I guess the, the, the
test will be it doesn't turn up somewhere else.
Hmm.
'Cause that will, that will create a problem.
Yep.
Um, and that we s- see the numbers slowly come down.
Just got to remember, we're right in the period where they're all hatching out.
Mm.
So we're like, you know, we could well see more before we see less.
But as long as it's in the same area, that gives us reasonable
confidence. So, I think we're a fair way from calling this thing
as being, you know-
Yeah.
... not able to do it. The thing I'm mindful of, I guess,
is, you know, with some of our respon- like we have government industry
partners here, but the beekeeper associations and this sort are not part of this
government industry agreement. So the people that are most concerned about the
impact of the hornet is on bee populations.
Yes.
That group does not have a government industry agreement.
That means they have no obligation
to contribute to the cost of this.
Interesting.
Right? Doesn't mean that they're not helping.
Yeah.
But the costs are substantive. So it's all
taxpayers' funds largely-
Mm-hmm.
... that are going into this. Now, um, I think everybody wants to kind of
have a go at kind of getting rid of this.
Mm-hmm.
'Cause that makes sense. But if we get into months and
months and months and no sense of being able to
control for it, um, and the millions begin to mount-
Mm. ... there'll be another set of decisions for Ministers-
... to make about, well, who's paying for this?
And tha- that's one of the challenges with this exercise is I think we're doing all
the right things and people have been terrific.
I mean, actually, actually the community's response has been phenomenal.
You know, people are really good about this stuff.
They've, they've really dug, dug in.
And I said, we've got, you know, 100,000 leaflets going out.
Hopefully we'll get more energy into it.
There are a small number of people that keep saying, "We need to do more."
Mm-hmm.
None of those people are paying for any of this or have an accountability for
paying for it. They don't even have to think about the cost of it.
Mm.
B- w- I have to.
Yep.
I have to. And I have to think about the cost of getting this job done,
along with cleaning up Clutha and stopping the clams and
making sure we don't have wilding pines everywhere.
And the next thing that we aren't dealing with yet but will turn up-
(laughs)
... no doubt the next six months.
You're reading my list of questions.
We need s-
So, so we've been talking about all those things.
Big war.
We would.
Yeah.
So.
Next we'll be needing grass, little bitches.
(laughs)
So, (laughs) I, i- in the scheme of things, you know, like it's a
nobody wants this. We don't want it. We want to get rid of it.
Our objective is, is to do that.
Please.
Um, we're only in the early phases.
And, and you know, 'cause you've been through these things with us before, these
things have a life of their own. You know, with fruit fly, we have a fairly
well developed method. We've removed it 13 times
or, you know, that's what's ended up happening.
Yeah.
Let's just say. So we have a method, the method's well
proven. We follow the method and we've tended to get to the result 'cause we've had
early identification.
Yep.
Um, so done that, that. We talk about the bird flu, it's contained within a
farm. Cleaned it up.
Yep.
Wasn't everywhere, managed to get it out.
Mm-hmm.
Um, you know, bovis, we managed to get rid of it because,
um, we got to it early enough.
Fingers crossed.
It's pretty hard. It's pretty hard.
But we also know how it comes into the country.
Mm-hmm.
The, this, these things like hornets and things are difficult.
Yeah.
Small-
Mm.
... small nests
can come in in a range of ways.
They can fly.
Luckily, we think it's-
Yeah. ... it's contained to this area.
Yeah.
Um, so there's every chance we'll win this.
Yes, hopefully so.
'Cause-
How
does sup- And on that, I think, uh, your colleague wants to say something.
(laughs) Oh no, I was just gonna say, but if we did get to that point
where we're there, we would, it's standard-
Oh,
... practice for us to do a cost benefit analysis.
Um, it's something that we do for bio-security hoosins to help inform that
decision around-
Okay.
... whether the costs of eradication, uh-
Um-
... exceed the benefits.
I mean, in, in the U- in the UK they have a suppression program.
Yeah.
So they, they just, got away on the...
And so they manage it in a s- seasonal pattern.
Yeah.
And they flex resources in, in the season to try and suppress the-
... the growth of the, of the thing.
So look, I, I, I think we've got a chance of winning this.
That's why we're throwing everything at it.
Yeah.
(laughs) Yeah. Yeah.
So, um, my, I have a sup- on the back of the question.
Yeah.
Is, with regards to your, um, little, um,
transmitters-
Oh.
... and where that sort of situation is at.
And whether they've, um, have they just come into the...
Have you just got hold of them and when are they gonna be?
Yep. So we've, yeah, so we've ordered them.
They've arrived, we've got them in the country.
Yeah.
Uh, and so the timing to use those, uh, it's, it'll
be more into January and onwards.
Okay.
And, and it's when the, it's when the workers, uh, if, if
they get established through, through, if there are some nests that we can't
find, uh, as the workers, uh, emerge and start
foraging, uh, and, and they build a bigger nest for queen,
uh, they're out and about, that's the time-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, you, you track live workers, uh, put the device on them.
Yeah.
Find, uh, track them back to the big nest.
And find it and destroy that.
Mm-hmm.
So January, January onwards.
Okay.
Uh, and it'll be the, the, the trapping and the surveillance that the work we're
doing now, we start to see, uh, if, if we start to see,
uh, numbers of workers out and about, then, then that will be deployed to
those
devices. Yeah.
Need a student army to be out monitoring.
(laughs)
Yeah, well I think, well I think the great thing about this, and it's a bit of a
thing for us going forward I think, is the level of community action.
Mm-hmm.
And I, you know, we've been talking about it quite a bit is, you know, we've had
really good (laughs) probably that Glenfield community's tired of us because, you
know, they've had to fruit flies many times and-
It's bad.
... and so on. Um-And see, you know, you've got a big port just across the
water.
Mm-hmm.
So, the proximity to the port, you know, we've probably been, you know, I
say touch wood, fortunate that we haven't had these things in
Tauranga.
Yeah.
Right? Right adjacent to growing areas and so on.
The hornet's not so much a problem for growers but fruit fly would be,
um, and so, um, I, look, I think, I think, I think
there's every chance we could, we could win this.
Mm-hmm.
But it's, uh,
few months to go yet, I think.
Yeah.
Yeah. Steve.
So, so, so Myron, and I just want to acknowledge, uh, Mike Inglis who came in, um,
I did a meeting with him over on the North Shore, um, which was well attended,
and there is a high level of public interest and, um, and also the rapid
response from... I suggested that we have an urgent briefing from you guys and
within two days we had the urgent briefing on it, so, with the support of the
committee, so appreciate that. Um, I think
your point about the, the opportunity we have is it's located in our most
populat- populous city, and that we should be having a summer
hornet nest hunt drive.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I'm serious about that.
Yeah.
There's a lot of people there and we should get them excited about trying to find a
hornet nest. Not touch it, but let you know about it.
Yeah. 'Cause I think that's the opportunity we have.
Yes. Yeah.
Um, and just to reiterate, like, it's clearly a
stitch in time opportunity because the cost of managing an ongoing event does take
a toll. It would be vastly more than whatever you tried it now.
Um, so I'm sure the committee agrees we'd like you to
do, keep doing your darnedest to eradicate the thing.
My question is, how much are you lined up with local
councils who obviously are dealing with biosecurity stuff all the time, and the
Department of Conservation on, on the eradication
effort? Are you working together on, with them?
Are you mobilizing the people that they have
interested in this space?
Mm-hmm.
Or is it just, this is an MPI thing, you guys stay out of it.
Because I, I've heard feedback that perhaps there could be some
more, um, expert mobilization, uh, across
local councils and the Department of Conservation. That's my first question.
And the second one is, how are you checking to make sure it hasn't already spread?
Like, are you, are you checking locations where, um,
it might be? Are there ways to do that?
Or is it just a wait and see?
Yeah, I'll get, get Mike to talk to you about everything with council, but yeah,
look, essentially it's, we are, we are engaging with council, with the, the local
board, Department of Conservation.
Uh, Mike's been up to Northland, spoken to the council there as well.
Yep.
Uh, so we absolutely need, you know...
Yes, MPI's leading this response, but, but, uh,
with, with all our responses, and particularly something like this that's in a
community, it's an urban area, uh, high public interest, yeah, we absolutely
do need everyone. Um, and I think Ray mentioned earlier, uh, you know,
nearly 100,000 f- leaflets are going out in mailboxes all across
Takapuna up in North Shore.
Exactly to your point of ask- asking people, "Look in your yard, look on your
eaves, your decks."
Yes. Right. "This is what this needs to look like.
Have a look." You know, people know their own yards better than we do.
So yes, but Mike, do you have anything-
I've got not much else to add to that, uh, but a couple of things
there. Also, the 8,000 beekeepers throughout the country, and although
Ray quite rightly said that the GIA partnership, it's, it's now got a beekeeping
industry, we took the decision to invite them as observer-
Mm-hmm.
... of the GIA partners meeting, and Department of Conservation are on there as an
observer too. So there's a real consequence to those 8,000
beekeepers. So within that one kilometer, so when there's 28 in that
space, we're engaging regularly, daily with them, and we're also visiting.
So that's surveillance of hives.
Mm-hmm.
8,000 throughout the country, and that's why I've been down both in terms
of the meeting, there was a meeting yesterday with Tauranga as well, with the
biosecurity... Who are very supportive, Northland
biosecurity team to make sure that we're getting that message out, as you said, to
continue. The public and the community, as always with these responses, are
vital. Alongside the 8,000 beekeepers, the engagement we've
given them, separate fact sheets, what to look for, surveillance, get the
engagement and making sure. The, the couple of beekeepers just for instance in the
area, like Plainfield Rugby Club, most days engaging with the team out there.
Hmm, okay, thank you. Thank you. Right, moving to Jo with a-
Oh, yes, excellent, thank you.
... primary question.
Yeah, um,
it kind of comes back to the earlier question I raised around
funding.
And when there is underspend.
Yeah.
And if we think about Calerpa-
Mm-hmm.
... and things like Madagascar ragwort,
um, the hornets and what have you-
Hornets. ... and all those sorts of things, the clams that are...
(laughs)
... um, incursions that we currently have, we don't know what's coming around the
corner. And yet, um, I just want to
understand better, when there is an incursion, is that when you then have to
go and ask for money? Is there not a, the ability to have
a contingency pool to deal with immediate, um,
conting- uh, immediate, um, things that come
up
that you could just start the ball rolling without having to...
Yeah. No, that's essentially it. So, no, it's a good question.
Um, so we, I mean, Stuart basically
carries about five million,
um, roughly. You might argue with me about that, but, um, uh-
Nice.
And MPI, N- MPI backs up as well. So usually when you see something turns up,
we move immediately a- and we have, we always have some resource
capability-
Right.
... to be able to get in and start to do something.
If it becomes a very big response, so if you take the avian influenza one-
Mm-hmm.
... down in Dunedin, we went to cabinet, um, once we had a
sense... So we mobilized our resources-
Yeah.
... we've got money we can put into it.
But we couldn't afford the potential $20 million that was gonna
come-
Yeah. ... as a result of cleaning that up.
So we went to cabinet and said, "That's what it looks like at this point." And
cabinet agreed to that 20 million plus.
Mm-hmm.
Another 20 million if we needed to come back and get it.
Yeah.
And so that's what generally happens on a big response where we have no
choices but to go after it or let a disease spread.
Yeah, yeah.
... now, each thing is different. And so with Calerpa, we've
managed to, um, fund it and, and the Ministry of Finance
has allowed us to carry forward underspend to keep going after that, so
that's been an effective way because we, we still aren't in a position to quite
know, uh, what we need in the long run and the best way-
Hmm.
... to go about it as we've seen the dieback of that.
And so, each, each one is ap- approached differently.
Some had baseline funding in it. I mean, wilding pines has 12 million a year
committed to it, wallabies has 6 million a year committed to it, um,
and so on, so they're all in slightly different positions, but they, but
basically, we have money to start.
Um, this, this hornet one, we're in a good financial position, so we'll probably
able to keep running that through ourselves.
But if it's gonna run, if it becomes a longer term issue, we will have to go to
cabinet at that point and, and then cabinet will ask us, um,
"Well," as Julie said, "What's the cost benefit on this?
Who else is contributing to the cost of this?
Um, what do you think the success rate might be?" And, and so on.
So they'll, they'll ask more questions of us in order that, that, that we would get
an investment.
So how would you get the balance right then when you've got, as, as an
example, um, with the Calerpa issue-
Yeah.
... the, um, analysis that's been done that it will, could potentially cost
9.4 billion, um, to the, I think it was billion,
million, to the economy-
We don't, we don't agree with that.
That's right, so and that's, that's the conundrum.
So, there's that analysis has been done and then, um, the likes of yourselves and
the minister don't-
Yeah.
... agree with it. H- how do you go about, um,
ensuring that you get the balance right and the information right in order to make
those best decisions as to the amount of funding that you are gonna require,
but also again, the analysis that-
Mm-hmm.
... you may have to do when something looks like it's just gonna get away and there
is just no chance in heck of keeping under control?
Yeah, I, I, I think we're pretty good at making judgments about the broad
cost range. I mean, we've done it with a whole range of responses and they've
been about right. C- you know, it doesn't matter who's in
government-
Yeah, yeah.
... cabinet doesn't always agree-
No.
... that it wants to spend the money or not.
Yep.
Or Minister of Finance doesn't always agree that it's gonna meet this year's budget
priority. So-
Yeah.
Um, we've, we have a pretty good view about most of the things we're
managing as to what we think it will take financially to do it.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
It's not always seen as being the highest priority or-
No.
But the things,
uh, in my, in my experience, where we have a disease that, uh, or a
pest or a problem that's a big threat,
um, uh, then, and it has the chance to be
controlled for, then the investment usually comes if we can't manage it
ourselves financially.
Hmm. Okay, thank you.
Steve, you had a sup?
Yeah, sup is on the wilding pine bit of it.
Oh, it's a new question then.
Is it new?
Yeah.
Go for it. Yeah, um, so I asked the minister about
the, the cut in the Jobs For Nature funding for wilding pine,
and he was saying it's gone down to, it went down to 10 million baseline funding on
wilding pine. He's put another two million bucks in on that.
Um, the Wilding Pine Network reckon we need 25 million a year for the next
decade.
Mm-hmm.
I've just directly been in Molesworth seeing what
a ravenous species-
Yeah.
... these pine trees are and
the prospect that a quarter of our land could be lost to wilding
pines in 30 years when you see the triffid-like kind of
progress of these things, it doesn't seem an exceptional
proposition. What is your advice to the
minister on how much-
Mm-hmm. ... we should be investing this because 25 million over 10 years doesn't sound
like a lot of money to me, that, that when it would serve to
protect
both ecology
and biodiversity values and productive land.
Y- pro- probably, probably a couple of things on the, on the financing of the
pines. Um,
y- we, we, there was a very small amount of money dedicated to wilding
pine, um,
uh, so, so I've been in this job seven years.
There was a small amount of money dedicated to wilding pines.
The wilding pine issue predated the last government as well.
(laughs)
So every, every minis- every set of ministers have been confronted with how much
money they want to spend on wilding pines.
So some money came in and then, uh, through the COVID response,
um, uh, that large amount of money came, it was a one-time, there w-
there was no cut to that funding, it was only-
... allocated one time.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
That's right.
And a big amount of money. So we took it-
Yeah.
... and, and because we had an active program, we were able to use it.
You know, like, that, that money was used well and it made a big, it made a big
difference.
A
Then we, then we came down to a new level.
We did get established a new level of 10 million a year.
So that it went up in the baseline and we've taken that up to 12 million through
the, our own savings. So, so that's now
a dedicated 12 million a year plus additional that comes through
the, uh, IVL and what conservation do
as well. So it probably sort of rounds out about 15 to 17 million a
year, um, including what councils contribute.
Um, we did a study a long time back, so that study went, um,
you know, as I said, this has transcended governments and ministers.
(laughs)
Mm-hmm.
Uh, there's been plenty of advice, everybody knows it's probably 25 to
30 million a year if you really want-
Mm-hmm.
... to try and clean the entire thing up.
But every government has to make a choice about whether and how much it can
prioritize to that against other things and that's what's happened across
time. And so we've seen an increase in funding and it, um,
I don't think the numbers have been, all that information has been publicly
released.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and, and we had done, we had sought the research on it.
Um, it's a question of whether...
One last point on it.
Why, why are these things difficult?
Absolutely.
It's like, um, the Madagascar reedy water war, any range of
weeds. Uh, it's like Calerpa and clams, but where, where you
have the most difficulty is where you are dealing with environmental
pests.
Mm-hmm.
Because there is no one else to help you fund it.
No.
Yeah.
That's-
Very
true. Right? So if we talk about Mycoplasma bovis, one third of the cost is met-
Mm-hmm.
... by farmers.... so they were levied for it.
Um, this happens, happened across a range of...
Fruit fly, um, 20 to 25% of that's charged back to
the horticultural industry. Um, with environmental
pests, we have no one to share the burden with, and so the taxpayer
takes the entire thing. Councils don't really have a lot of money they can invest
in it. They, some of them do and they invest time, and they work with us, but they
don't have... they don't have the money to invest significantly enough in it.
So therefore, it becomes a budget item-
(clears throat)
... essentially in the main budget. And that's...
So it's the environmental pests that are most problematic for us to finance.
And I suppose it, it's a public good effort though, isn't it?
That's right.
Because it has a broad benefit-
... also to the productive sector.
Yeah, oh, totally. Yeah,
Maybe we need a levy on foresters, a small wilding pine levy.
Well, the tr- the, the difficulty with, the difficulty with wilding pines is it's,
it's largely got, it's largely not to do with, uh-
Temporary.
... forest owners. It was, it was government's only efforts. It's a part of it.
Um, so my f- my final, uh, question would
be, um... Oh no, I, it's, I think I'm done on that.
Oh.
Done on that. Suze.
Um, what percent, of the 12 million, what percent of it is spent on
actually getting rid of the pines?
Yes.
Like, is much of it taken up with admin or is it, is that all used up on the front
line to actually destroy them or burn them or to do whatever it is you need to do
with them?
Well, there, there, there's an eight minute confidences, but I don't know the
answer to
that. Or measuring or...
(laughs) Yeah, I mean, obvi- obviously we have a team.
You know, we need to, we need to run the thing.
Um, uh, but, uh, you know, the, you know, the, the vast majority of it
goes on actually controlling wilding pines and then there is some, there is some
work around research as well, uh, different control methods and things like
that. Uh, and, uh, publicity, awareness work and so on
as well. Final comment.
Thank you very much.
Just, just that the on the ground people are disheartened by the, the
drop in the funding. They've seen the work that was achieved during the heightened
funding-
Mm, yeah, yeah.
... been lost, like, right before their eyes 'cause they needed to keep going.
Yeah.
So, think if there's a decision to have a big bang of money, it needs to
be-
Yes, yes it does.
... keep on it until the job's done. But that's a general observation.
If we could prioritize money into it, you'd be supportive?
Yeah.
Yes?
Absolutely.
Yep, yep.
Appreciate it.
Yep.
That's all? Very good. Um,
I think we'll, uh-
We'll take
... move on now to food safety.
Yep.
Yeah, so.
Thank you, Chair.
Chair?
Thank you.
On completion, there was a five-minute break.
No, we're gonna run through and go for a 10-minute break later.
Okay.
I've, I've got a question.
Well, I'm hoping to get a sub coming in, so I'll wait for-
Well, I've got a question.
... I'll wait for everybody.
I've just, I've just indicated the chair, so thanks Chair.
You've got a question too.
Um, uh, thanks team. I've got a question about meat inspections,
um, and I've got a line of questioning, so I'd just like to be able to do a
sustained line of questioning. Thanks, Chair.
Um-
Yes.
... if you could tie it into the, uh-
Meat, yeah, it's meat inspections, which is part of the annual review.
... into part of the meeting,
yes. Part of the work of MPI, yeah, yes. So, um, one of the things
that MPI have been doing over the last little while, and this is something that has
been going on, um, during the term of the, um, annual review is
consulting on changing the statutory functions of Meat Inspection
Services from official quality to one carried out by process.
Um,
so, have you done an analysis around, um, if that
move does go ahead, um, where it's self-regulated
by industry, how many of the 615 official
assessors employed at official quality would keep their
jobs?
Um, look, um, we're currently consulting on changes to the
red meat, uh, the meat export notice.
Um, it's got, Chair, got, it's got three, three elements to it.
Um, it's got a change to the training for
meat inspectors, which is currently a AQ-only
process. It's got a change to the ante-mortem inspection
and a change to meat inspection. What it doe- uh, what it does is
shift the weight from, uh, government inspectors to more company
inspectors. There is still a official assessor who will
be an employee of AQ, um,
at the end of every line. We have, um, we've worked very
closely with AQ and the meat industry in
forming the proposals. We have, um, an understanding of what the
possible impact could be. Um, we're talking about what we have
proposed as a three-year phase-in.
So for companies who are not currently involved in the company meat
inspection process, it would be three years.
If it did proceed and at the end of three years
AQ may go from having 580 meat inspectors that
they do at the moment-
Yes.
... to around 250.
Right. Okay. What would happen to the other?
The, the, the others will there b- there'll be a strong market for
assessors or company meat inspectors, and we would
expect a fair number of those people may well end up being employed
by the companies.
Okay, I've got one more sub on this, Chair.
Yeah.
Um, and that's just relating to, I guess, the, the impact on
compliance because, um, in question time, Mark Patterson
answered on the 13th of November that there'd been no noticeable difference
between the two options, yet we have had, you know, communications
from employees saying there will be a significant impact on compliance.
So, just interested in the analysis that MPI have
done around differences in compliance between, you know,
one that's led from a statutory body through to
industry-led.
We've had over 10 years to, um, see how
increased company meat inspection will work.
So we have about 17% of plants already using
extensive company meat inspection work.
We, we don't, at the moment don't see a measurable difference in terms of
the outcomes, in terms of food safety.
We would not be putting this proposal forward-...
if we had any concerns that this would, would affect food safety, all our
markets at the end of the day. Um, we're confident that
we, that we've, the proposal still retains a significant
government presence. So we will have a vet inside on
plant every day, every moment that plant's operating.
So we'll supervise and there will be, at the end of every
line, an official assessor employed by the government.
So there's a fair bit of government involvement there.
Do you have a sup, Steve?
Uh, not on that one, no.
Um-
I do.
(laughs)
Um, so, uh, in your e- evaluation and
assessment, will you be considering
cultural differences? Whereby some
cultures who, who would be employed at this
area
may not have the confidence to shut down the
chain if, you know, as it currently happens, if
they felt there was, uh, something, um,
amiss with, in their inspections.
Have you, have you thought about that?
We, we haven't expressly looked at cultural differences, but we've got
10 years worth of experience in a company meat inspection model.
Hmm.
We don't see a difference in terms of the willingness to, as you
describe it, shut down the line when we have,
uh, you know, a substantially company-driven meat
inspection system. At the end of the day, the businesses
are highly motivated to get it right.
You know, they're not, they're not going to, you know, cut a corner that will
bounce back on them in, in market. So it's like any
business. You know, quality's a bottom line and food safety is definitely
that as well. So with the e- the proposed level of
government involvement still, we, we're confident that people will do the
right thing and, and the company meat inspectors, or the government
inspectors will do the right thing and call it if it needs to be
called.
Okay, thanks. All right, moving on to, uh, Robert and
Steve.
Yeah, how appalling is it from a food safety point of view
that, that government has public lunch program
feeding moldy mincemeat to schoolchildren?
It's under review.
Yes. Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
School lunches are under re- yeah, not program.
Well, maybe-
Encouraged under the
(coughs) That's a long stretch,
though. ... review process at the moment.
Yeah. From a, from a food safety point of view (overlapping dialogue)
Frame the question properly.
Yeah, excuse me.
Yeah.
Well, if you want me to address the matter, we'll...
Um, uh,
let's see. We, um, we became aware,
uh, because the media notified us, um, uh, asking questions
about, um-
(whispers) (overlapping dialogue)
... whether, whether, um, moldy lunches had been provided or not.
So, um, uh, within 24 hours, we'd undertaken an
initial review with the school and with the
provider and, um,
we have communicated that, uh, we haven't completed our
investigation.
Mm.
So I want to be clear about that. We'd like to actually have the opportunity to
complete the investigation. But, um, because of the public
commentary that was made, and particularly out to parents and people about
the, the risk of the food, we felt it was important to clarify our
view about what we think has happened here.
And our view is that, um, that
there's been, um,
a, a, some disorder if you like, in the handing out of the meals in the
school. And it is likely that that is where, um, the, the
leftover food was, was actually found and was mixed
in, um, with what was provided on the day.
So we think it's a mistake that's occurred.
Um, we understand that these things happen, and we're quite keen to work with the
school to try and help them with their processes.
They, they receive a lot of meals at that school, they distribute a lot of meals to
a lot of kids, um, and we think we could probably help them with that.
But our conclusion is that this, this issue has occurred at
the school, not, not at the provider of food.
So before the conclusion of your review, you've already concluded that, and
yet the-
Well, we've undertaken enough work, so we've moved very...
What, what we do when somebody, if somebody raises, if somebody
raises publicly an issue of food safety
where there's significant consumption, we move very quickly to try and understand
what that is. So we have to tell people-
Mm.
... what to do.
And so you will know that we recall food quite quickly.
We will, w- you know, uh, even with the particular provider, we have, we've
undertaken any number of reviews in the school lunch area and we have moved quickly
and we've made statements where we've needed to to give, um, surety or to require
things to happen. Um, but we do it with all food companies,
um, uh, when we think there's a risk.
And so I think what's been important here is we moved quickly to try and
understand. And our view about it from what we've seen, so y- you know, these,
these food safety investigators of ours that do this all the time, they're pretty
good. Um, and, and their view is that there's been a, been
a problem at the school with distribution of these things.
And we can work with them to, to help that and that...
Remember this, these lunches went to, um, 15 other schools.
There's parents too with children that are receiving these lunches.
People need to know that, um, these lunches are safe to eat, and we think that they
are.
And so the question I guess is that, did you sit
down and see the CCTV footage that the principal
said that they played to, uh, Food Safety
and demonstrated that the lunches were taken away the preceding
week? And the other point, which I think is salient, is
that the lunches were served hot and the school has no
facility for heating lunches, so they're clearly the lunches that were
brought-
(whispers)
... by the provider. And you are contesting that?
Well, um, as Ray says, we, we are still doing our investigation.
Uh, we were at the school, um, the next morning.
Uh, and we were at Compass the next morning as well.
We're since-
That's the Tuesday,
is it? Yes. That's the Tuesday.
Yeah.
So the event happened on the Monday.
On Tuesday morning, we were at the school.
Uh, we've also been to Compass two more times yesterday.
Uh, and so we're following the evidence. That's what we do.
You know, like that dispassionate, that careful....
they just follow the evidence. Um, what w- so this, to get
to the condition those meals were in-
Mm-hmm.
... when they were delivered or when they, you know, they were seen on Monday,
would take several days.
Yes.
It would take the right temperature to, to get to that
condition. Um, the same meal
was, was served, in a sense, the same, same batch of food, it's
exactly same menu was deliv-... was served on Thursday
last week and served on Monday. Um, that's a common feature,
you know, a bit like home. You know-
Mm-hmm. ... we often have, uh, same meals. So it's the same, the same
meal. We, we were, when we went to the school,
the principal was generous and gave us full access to the school.
We did observe the closed-circuit TV footage in
detail. We, we recorded what we saw.
We're confident in the numbers. We saw, we
saw, um, eight bo- eight boxes coming into the school
and nine boxes leaving. That's on, that's on the
Monday. What we also became aware of is that the
school retains several other boxes,
uh, for various purposes, and we think that's probably what's happened
and caused the confusion. These boxes are s- like large
hot boxes. They se-... they contain about 40 me- 44
meals. Uh, that's how they arrive.
They arrive sort of midmorning, they're served, and
Compass come back in the afternoon and pick them up.
What we think has happened, totally innocently-
(coughs)
... is, is a box, because they have these spare boxes, has
remained in one place in the school
and has gotten mixed up with the ve- with the meals the nex-...
on the Monday. The school was closed due to a stu-...
to Teacher Only Day on the Friday, so it sort of adds
up, th- that, that, that remained there.
Wh- we're still working through this temperature issue, whether it's possible,
because these are hot boxes, whether it's possible it could be lukewarm several
days later. Possibly yes, possibly not.
Mm-hmm.
Um-
It's possible. ... we know there's about between 10 and 20 meals that were, that were
affected. The school gets over 300 meals a day.
Only one school had this experience, and only one part
of the school had this experience, the, the, what they call the
canteen, which all adds up to suggest that somehow in the
canteen, some meals remained in a
box, got intermingled with incoming meals on the
Monday, and innocently served out.
So my final question sub, if that's okay,
Chair, is
why is your default to say it's a problem of the school's
management of it rather than Compass' management of it? 'Cause i-...
even if what you assert, that it was to do with lunches being left behind
that should've been taken away, surely that's the
responsibility of the lunch provider, Compass.
It, it's a shared responsibility. So wha-... so the s-...
Compass doesn't control what the school does and how the school distributes the
pa-... the lunches, and each school does that subtly differently
depending on their resources and their number of students.
There's a, a fair bit of variability. There will be lessons out of this.
There'll be, there'll be findings and recommendations, and one of them may well
be-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, that we, you know, that we encourage Education to work with schools
to get, to get better processes to make sure that there is an
absolute correlation between what goes in and what goes out, and that...
and more certainty around how those meals are looked after during the course of
their life.
What is the food safety risk ?
Um, if you want a, you want a technical answer, if it is just mold,
it's hugely unpleasant, but unlikely to be, to be,
to be, you know, poisonous, if you like.
(laughs)
If there was bacteria, that's a different matter. The meal, we ha-...
we've got some of the meals, so we are...
you know, w- we'll look through and we'll get them tested.
Okay.
It's what we normally do.
D- can I just offer just, just one thing on this?
'Cause, 'cause we wanna be helpful here, basically, um,
we, we do get a range of, um, complaints
come through to us-
Mm-hmm. ... or concerns about, uh, meals in the school lunch program.
Mm-hmm.
But they come to us first so we have an ability to get on-
... and figure out what the school or what the provider, what needs
doing, or what the problem might be. Um, b- because thi-...
you know, things go wrong-
Mm-hmm.
... at, at both ends of this thing. I think, um...
so I think the thing I would just encourage is if, if a school's
worried or finds something, um, let us know and then we
can get in there straightaway. We'll get in there straightaway and try and help,
help sort it out. I s-... I think the difficulty is, if these things
become a public issue before anyone's been able to kinda, kinda figure out what's
gone wrong, you know, y- y-... you know, we- we will have to respond
and let people know whether we think the food provider's got a problem,
'cause that affects
so many people beyond the, uh, uh, initial
complaint.
Yeah. Rachel and then Todd.
So, so, so thank you. Um, thank you, Chair.
I, I do just actually wanna come back to that period around the annual review in
terms of the numbers of complaints you've had in the school lunch program-
Yeah. ... compared to pre-... like, so how many in that '24, '25 year-
Yeah. ... would you about the school lunch program?
Uh, the, the program commenced this school year.
Yeah.
Um, we've had, um, uh, we've had 86-
Mm-hmm.
... in the total year to date.
Wow, that's-
Uh, 86 complaints.
Right.
Of which we have initiated 49
investigations.
(clears throat)
So, you know, some of them we were able to quickly dis-...
determine were, were th-... uh, unlikely to be
plausible. Um, we work really closely with
Compass and really closely with the Ministry of Education.
It, it was a challenging thing to set up, no question about it.
Mm-hmm.
And, and the School Lunch Collective, uh, remembering that, that it started
with La Belle-
Mm-hmm,
that's right, yeah. ... as a key part, and that, that had h- its problems, and that made
life more complicated. S-... it feeds 70...
75,000 s-... kids a day, five days a week-
Holy m-
... across over 400 schools. It's a very big undertaking.
Mm-hmm.
You know, Compass are a very professional business, global business,
so they've taken that on. They're doing their level best.
We've worked really hard with them to lift their game.
What we have seen in the last term is a significant drop-off in
complaints and issues. We... I think we've got about seven in this, this
term year to date.
How does that compare with previous years, th-...
It, it, it, it is much higher than previous years. There's no question about it.
Mm-hmm.
But that's... you know, we're talking about a system that, that had to stand
up-... quite quickly, significant change from the
previous system, uh, and it's not, you know, it- it- it's
understandable to some extent why- why the performance
issues and operating issues would arise given that short period-
Just the- that the level of this last term's actually been s- much
more normative, so.
Harmon-
Yeah, just one through this up, um, just coming back to the issue that my colleague
has raised because it does speak to, you know, obviously future plans, um, from a
program that is running and, you know, through-
Mm-hmm.
... through this last financial year.
Um,
do you not think that, uh, I guess,
forming a- a- a- a appears that the ministry's formed a final view,
but I think in fairness to the school, um, you know,
ensuring that I guess that is still a- a preliminary view
into- in- before the- before the full,
um, you know, before the full investigation is complete because there is still a
chance that it could have actually come- so I think, you know,
uh, it- it- it appears that it's a- a final view, but,
you know, surely I guess just the- the- in the interest of fairness to-
Yeah. W- we- w- we would not have issued a interim view on
it had the thing not been in public domain in the manner it was-
Yeah. ... that alarmed parents.
Mm-hmm.
No question about it. So we had to quickly iss- either tell parents there's
a problem with Compass and deal with Compass or suggest that it's this issue at the
school. So one thing had to be done. You know, you couldn't sit around not do that.
Too much concern. Um, we- we will
continue to have an open mind as we conclude- conclude.
We've looked at all the possibilities.
We've been at Compass four times now-
Yeah.
... you know, uh, in the last two days. So we're all over them like a rash.
Mm-hmm.
Um, if it was there, we'd- we'd have more than likely found
it.
Mm-hmm.
Talk.
It is slightly embarrassing when people jump to conclusions, isn't it?
Um, just to pick up on Mr. Abel's questions, and I think you just want to be very
clear. So, um, you were there on the Tuesday morning at the
school doing your investigation. Um, this became public on the Monday.
When- when did you first learn about this issue?
Point of order. Sorry to interrupt, but I don't believe we're allowed to wear our
party pins. It's like the rules in the House and the Select Committee that apply
here.
No, no problem. Just removing my Act Party pin, everyone.
Talk about performative.
I know.
(laughs) Yeah.
We- we- we became aware of it, uh, on the Monday
afternoon. Uh, we were alerted by- uh, by- by media-
By media.
Yes.
So when did you... So you were first learned from the media, so the school didn't
come directly to you till later on?
No, they didn't. No.
Okay, thank you.
Right. Um, we
move on from that topic, I guess. Um-
It's embarrassing for a lot of people.
Um-
It was good that you were there.
So- Should be.
Right.
You should be.
Sorry, the food safety stuff. Could you run through what's happening with...
So the, um-
(laughs)
... you're doing some changes in the-
Even betterst.
... baking, uh, products
which, uh, a few of my constituents are very happy about-
(laughs)
Mm-hmm. ... because, um, they're very small businesses and they've
found the burden of
what they're doing up to now, um, um, quite difficult.
So...
Yeah, look, um, the- the Food Act's been enforced for over 10 years,
so, um, it, you know, it's- it's timely to have a look at how- how it's
operationalized and working on the ground.
It covers 39,000 businesses. That's a lot of businesses.
Mm-hmm.
You know, it covers from, uh, you know, the biggest supermarkets we have down
to- down to the cake maker at home. So it's a very...
It's a lot of businesses it covers. Um, we've been...
We- we worked late last year, um, and into this year
on what we're calling a Food A- Food Act improvement
plan in- in conjunction with our minister.
Um, we've released that plan, um, and over the next
12 to 18 months, we'll progressively work through that.
It's got a range of elements to it, including looking at the settings in
terms of risk versus regulation, see we've got those things
about right. We- we- we heard from the very beginning,
cake makers, home-based cake makers' concerns, so that was an easy
thing to sh- to- to shift. We will look at other areas that, um, to
make sure that those settings are- are- are right, risk versus
regulation. We- we may make some changes to the schedules as a
result of that, where it's- where it's safe to do that and it's an appropriate
thing. We're also looking at things like consistency across,
um, territorial authorities, you know, with this is a- a shared task over
67 territorial authorities. They've got different ways of dealing with things,
different fee structures, so we want to see where we can get some more- more
consistency across those councils.
Yeah.
Thanks for that. Um, I guess one of the
common, uh, complaints, if you like, about the
current system is, uh, they're paying for the
same thing twice from their territorial authority-
Mm-hmm.
... in some cases, as they do with
MPI.
Um, any further questions?
Uh, a quick one, yeah. Um,
in terms of the small operators, um, we
had a pretty compelling submission from a food truck operator in
Nelson some time ago.
Mm-hmm.
And
just the
magnitude of compliance around, um, reasonable
expectations that obviously we are all deeply concerned
and it's very important that we have high food safety standards.
No question there. But when you compare the risk
in providing that many school lunches to that many kids-
Mm-hmm.
... versus, uh, a local, you know, coffee
cart down in the Nelson market providing a much
lower volume of food to far fewer people,
um, it becomes a barrier to those smaller operators doing
business if that compliance-
Mm-hmm.
... uh-... rail is just beyond their reach in terms
of cost, in term... those sorts of things.
How do you account for that? Uh, that is to say a reasonable
compliance burden around something very important, food safety,
for small operators?
I'll look at that. That's exactly why we're looking at the Food Act, uh,
itself. And, um, I've talked about the balance between risk and
regulation.
Yeah.
So, uh, Ben, who we've, who we, you know-
... are in close contact with Ben and I enjoy interacting with Ben.
Um, he, he's a good sort of case study-
Mm-hmm.
... to look at, and we are going to look at those sort of
businesses to see, to see where they're go- get the balance right.
We're very open to considering that, that might, we might need to shift that
a bit.
Mm-hmm. Rachel?
Can I just ask ............................ on that, just related to Ben's case?
Because one of the points I think he's made really well is that the compliance
and the licensing costs and things that he pays, uh,
essentially match that of a business that runs a seven-day operation.
So, you know, he's got, he's a one-day operation-
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
... and a very small operation compared to, you know, uh, the
nearby McDonald's, which is obviously 24/7-
Mm-hmm.
... much larger scale operation. And I, just wondering if that's still part of your
considerations?
Yeah. Well, have a look at it. It's difficult.
A bit like when you get your car registered-
Yeah.
... uh, you know, if you, if you just take it to church on Sunday, uh, you know,
the old, elderly person versus if you're using it seven days a week, you pay
the same cost. So, it is quite difficult
to, to calibrate down on them, you know.
This is choice. You know, Ben chooses to only
operate on one day a week.
Mm-hmm.
So, we'll look, certainly look at it.
It's a bit more difficult to get down to that level of calibration.
Yeah.
Lauren's got a quick question.
Yes, on that one. Um, you know, I understand the balance that, you know, you're
going to need to reach, which is about, um, safety,
food safety and the, you know, the end of the game.
So I guess it doesn't matter how long they're open for, as
long as the standards are all met. So is that going to be, it's
gonna be a benchmark across all industry, um, in terms of the
standards that were met? You know, 'cause a, a moldy muffin in a
coffee cart versus a moldy muffin in a school was still a moldy muffin.
Uh, look, the, the legal obligations of the Food Act are the
same, whether you're Fonterra or, or a coffee
cart. So, it, it, it's just the application of the
tools, things like verification and registration that, that
may, that we may shift to make them more
proportionate. But the obligations to produce food, a
safe and suitable food, stays absolutely the
same.
Thank you. Uh, we'll- ... we'll take another
ten-minute break until five past, if that's all right?
(laughs)
Hello.
You've arrived just in time to take a break.
(laughs) Hey.
You get to have a break.
Yeah. (laughs)
(laughs)
Very
good. Welcome back. I'll get time to stretch your
legs.
Um, we're gonna move on to, uh,
fisheries. So, uh, Rachel has a
question.
Yes, thank you. I'll have a few.
Sure.
Yes, sure. Um, morning, team. Um, and
nice to see you, Dan. And actually, I think this is the first time we might've seen
you, so can I just, uh, offer our condolences-
Oh.
... to you and your family, so-
Thanks very much.
Yeah. Um, so I've got lots I could talk to you about.
We've only got half an hour. Um, can I start with the
reforms? And I do want to thank your team for a really useful
briefing around the reforms. But, uh, this is a similar line of questioning too,
about live export. And just wondering when the legislation's going to come-
Oh.
(laughs) Because obviously, the announcement was made awhile ago.
Yeah, yeah.
I need to know when you're looking to put that through to the House.
Yeah. So it's in the drafting process now with Parliamentary Counsel Office, and
first quarter of next year is what we're aiming for.
Yep, okay. Good. Um-
And, and, uh, with the goal of being passed, um, next year.
With the goal of being passed next year. Yep.
Um, different line of questioning now where I might get into a bit more detail.
And that is around, um, recent, um, I guess, uh,
consultation around marlin. And, um, hope
you'll be prepared, um, with, with some information around this.
There has been significant, uh, pushback from recreational
fishers about marlin being pulled into the QMS,
um, and bycatch being able to s- be sold commercially.
So, can I get a briefing? I guess, can we get a briefing
now on the work that you're doing and why that, um, has been put into
the, you know, possibility of policy
reform?
Sure. So the, um, the proposal, um, was raised by the fishing
industry, I think, uh, as part of a wider sort of set of, you
regulatory opportunities. Um, and the proposal was that if a
fisher, a commercial fisher happened to catch a marlin and it was
dead, uh, they could keep it and sell it rather than, uh, have to discard
it. Um, it's a relatively small number.
I think, um, since we've had cameras on the relevant boats,
there have been over 600 marlin being caught by commercial fishers.
Um,
so, uh, people have been worried. Uh,
the concerns we've heard is that, that although there was never a proposal that
marlin would be allowed to be targeted by commercial fishers or be brought into the
qui- quota management system, people are kind of concerned that those things could
happen, uh, down the track. Uh, we've had over 20,000
submissions on this matter.
Wow. Yeah.
We now, um, submissions were closed quite recently, so we're now kind of analyzing
all that and, uh, weighing it up to give some advice to the minister.
And I know he's obviously been out speaking to people as well, so...
So around 600. Is that an annual figure?
I, I think that is the number since
January '24. So, um, close to
two years, I believe.
Because I guess the concern I picked up-
Yeah.
... is that as a starting point that it can be, the bycatch can be
sold, and then-
Yeah.
... that becomes a slippery slope and eventually leads to...
And that's happened with other species, right, where byca- you know,
bycatch that is caught dead, able to be sold
commercially. Um, and then the ultimate outcome
is that it ends up included in the QMS.
Yeah. And that certainly wasn't the intention here, um, from our, well,
minister's perspective. Uh, but that is what people are worried about.
Yeah.
So, so we're thinking quite carefully about-
It's a fair wo- It's
It's a fair concern, I guess, because it has happened for other species, so...
Yeah, it's an understandable concern. So...
Yeah.
I think, uh, we'll look at it quite carefully.
Yep. How long do you think the timing will be in terms of
decision-making?
I'm not sure. I mean, we're working through all the submissions now.
Um, it's part of a package of measures.
Um, so no, I'm not quite sure.
Okay.
It could be like late this year or first part of next year.
Is it possible that it could end up being tied up in the fisheries reform that's
coming through in terms of legislation, that it would be one of hooded in
that law that's gonna be introduced next year?
Uh, don't think so, no.
I think it's too early to say, isn't it, yeah?
Yeah.
But no, I wasn't expecting that.
All right. Okay.... but printing all our questioning.
Steve.
I have a different line.
You go ahead and ?
Um, (clears throat) in terms of the agriculture space-
Mm-hmm.
... um, the government obviously put through the substandard piece of legislation
that extended the, uh, consents for every fish
farm.
Um, one of the reform, or the amendment
questions that we prosecuted somewhat at this committee was around
whether it was appropriate to give, uh, consents to
fish farms in particular, because they're, they make up a small percentage of
the total number, and, um, tend to be a source of more
of the problems and challenges. So, first question's really
around, um, how you are addressing those
problems of pollution, um, disease, um,
welfare issues of fish farming, which is different to mollusk farming,
obviously. Um, and then the second question is, there was a
handful of farms that have been designated by regional councils to be
inappropriately located, um, because they were too shallow,
because they were in, um, places that were too warm
to be effective. And yet, those were all also
given the extension. That was one of the amendments that
was proposed and failed, was to say, "Well, maybe we shouldn't give an extension to
the ones that are inappropriately located." I wonder, do you have
specific strategies around managing, um, those
two examples, fish farming and inappropriately
located agriculture projects?
Well, in the, I guess, just out of the bigger picture, we
see a lot of opportunity for agriculture to
grow in New Zealand. We see a lot of opportunity for the salmon industry in the
cold waters of the South Island. Um, so all of
those, uh, sort of things around environmental performance and welfare will
be very important for an industry if- if it is to kind of,
uh, thrive and grow. The industry itself, so,
uh, salmon industry in particular, so they pay a lot of attention, so they've
got their own, uh, sort of welfare...
like call it plan or- or something that they work to.
They've- they've got their own environmental things that they work to that's on top
of the requirements that are put on them by councils.
Um, so... Oh, and of course, welfare,
they're subject to the Animal Welfare Act.
Um, occasionally MPI gets a- a matter raised that it
has to look at, um, for fish farming under the Animal Welfare Act, so, you know,
fish are sentient, they feel pain, it's- it's all, uh, an important part of
the thing. So,
I guess some of these things are for- for industry to deal with.
Um, and some of these things are where the regulator, whether it's
the council, us from the waterfront perspective, uh, also need
to, uh, play a role. Um, I'm not sure of
the detail of your second question about the inappropriate areas, and I don't
know if Alistair can ?
Um,
I- I mean, I think just to reinforce what Dan would have just said just
there in terms of the- the broader effects that can, those farms can
have. There's a,
you know, certain amount of effects that, um, the industry themselves are, um,
responsible for. Um, the one thing we did put into the legislation
is, um, the ability for councils to review consents, uh, in quite
specific situations. And one of them was for these sorts of
farms, or farms that were older and hadn't necessarily had a modern
set of, a more recent consent. So the councils do have an ability there
to relook at the consent and see if there are some modern conditions that they
could put on.
At their own cost, I seem to remember.
That's right. So there are some constraints around when and how councils can use
that. But that has a- a bit of a lifespan, and the idea is that when the
new resource management reforms come in, um, you know,
councils will have the wider ability under those reforms to- to look at those and
make sure that they're meeting more modern standards of- of
environmental conditions.
One more
Um, it's on octopus farming.
Robby.
Yeah.
So, uh, there is some global interest in
farming octopus.
Mm-hmm.
Um, if anyone hasn't seen My Octopus Teacher, I recommend you do, because it
gives you a quite powerful insight into the, what a phenomenal
animal they are, and what an intelligent animal they are.
Um, and I wonder what the status of that,
uh, of prospects around that industry are in this country.
I know there's been some money invested, uh, on researching
octopus farming, and its appropriateness here.
I wonder if you guys are across that at all.
Not in detail, but I'll, what I'll say is that, like when we see the big
opportunities, uh, in salmon and mussels,
maybe another fin fish like king fish, uh, certainly we have currently focus on
octopus farm promoting this moment.
I'll be glad if it never happened. Rachel-
Oh, you already said haven't.
I s- no, it should not happen. Should
not.
(laughs)
(laughs) (laughs)
Keen to talk, keen to talk salmon, actually, and then agriculture
generally. Um, so in your
introductory comments today, um, Ray, you talked about opportunities with
salmon.
Yes.
One of the big challenges we have is actually meeting demand, that actually our
supply often can't keep up with the global demand-
Yes. ... especially if at a premium-
Yes.
... level.
So-
Yes. ... where do you see MPI's role to actually support-
Yeah.
... like continuing to scale up-
Yeah, totally.
... our salmon? 'Cause that's the, that's the feedback I get from industry-
Oh, good.
... in Nelson is-
Yep. ... is we can't produce enough to meet global demand, particularly for that, you
know, king-
No.
... Norra King type premium product. Yeah.
Well, in- in the United States alone, I mean, I think demand went up 22%, you know,
just last year. So, in- in higher value markets, um, that they
pick salmon-
So the, um... Dan can talk about it in more detail, but we've got
that, um, plan to get agriculture up to three billion by
2035.
Mm-hmm.
But if you think about, um... if you think about salmon
farming, it's probably... You know, it could, it could easily be a $10 billion
industry if you start looking at, uh, 2040 to 2050.
Um, Christchurch sort of down to Stewart Island, the further south you
get in that stretch of water there, maybe 20Ks out, um,
open ocean agriculture farming, um, is really what we've
been, um, advocating for.
Mm-hmm.
Um, uh, we're gonna get our first sort of, uh, real
taste of it with ʻŌlewa Deba, right?
Yeah, yep.
So, you know, it's pretty ambitious out in the Cook Strait. Um, five, six Ks out.
Um, that's not too far away. We're gonna learn a lot from that.
We've obviously got some investment in that through the Prime Sector Growth Fund,
so we'll be able to get the IP out of that, which will help, um, for
others-
Mm-hmm.
... that want to come into the market.
Uh, there's been a lot of, um... There was quite a lot
interest, um, internationally in talking about this, uh, particularly from
Japanese companies that some of which have quite long histories in New Zealand,
um, as, as investors. So, um, I think, yeah, you're right, there's certainly plenty
of demand for the product. Um, the big challenge has been the Resource
Management Act rules-
(laughs)
... which sort of basically stymied the whole thing.
Yeah.
Um, so the review there is really quite critically important.
I mean, these two have been, um, deeply involved, they can talk about that.
Uh, along with, um, what FastTrack might be able to offer, uh, in terms of
ʻīkaroa developments. But I don't know if you two want to talk a bit about, uh, how
this gets opened up a bit more, um, Alison?
Um, yes. Well, so I think, um... That's right.
So the, the key things to enable it are, um, a bit
more certainty about our ability to create,
uh, you know, spatial planning for-
Yeah.
... where, uh, aquaculture is appropriate.
I'm particularly thinking about salmon in some of the South Island,
cover South Island waters and the open ocean.
Um, and I think there is a bit an opportunity there because obviously that's a bit
less of a ʻīkaroa base when you look a bit further out from the, um,
inshore. Yep.
Um, so that's the first thing. And then secondly, um,
uh, you know, making sure that there's, yeah, as part of that really good science
done to ensure that that's the right area, uh, and then a bit more certainty about
actually consenting.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and so the big opportunity obviously is through the, um, resource management
reforms that are coming through in terms of how that deals with the coastal marine
area generally, uh, but, but specifically aquaculture.
So, so we'll be working with pretty closely with MPI on that.
Yeah, I mean one of the, one of the questions I've got, I guess around the existing
FastTrack process that's currently being used is,
um, you know, how... We'll use... Even though it's not a requirement
under the act, will you still be considering the, you know, the effects on the
environment as part of that analysis in
terms of FastTrack consents for
aquaculture? Well, well our role in, in that is fairly sort of pro-
prescribed, if you like. The big matters that, that the, um, that
MPI will be asked about and, uh, things like the
adverse, uh, the undue adverse effects test on fishing under the Fisheries Act-
Yeah.
... where we'll, um, we'll be required to provide information, uh, and there
may be other matters that we're asked to provide information. But it's, uh...
Yeah, we don't run that process, so... Yeah.
Just, I've got another question about agriculture and that's around the capa-
people capability side.
Um... You know, it'd be fair to say-
Mm-hmm.
... that NMIT's agriculture program is not as...
You know, i- i- it's not as highly sought after as it was, and, you know, there are
some staff that are no longer there.
And it's, it's critical, right, that we're actually upskilling and training.
So I'm just wondering, do you see a role for MPI in actually
enabling, like, capability development in
order for us to do that scale up
in aquaculture? Like, is there an opportunity there that you could be
using?
Well, uh, in the round, yes, in the sense that, um...
Uh, both working with industry, but also, you know, our wider
team, Julie's team, you know, they...
All of that kind of moving parts around, uh, the education system, workforce
issues, immigration issues, um, our team engages in with a view
to-
Mm-hmm. ... uh, getting the best outcomes for the primary industries.
And so, whe- whether it's just re-education or whether it's some other
ʻome motion, yes, we, we have a role to help influence on
those
systems and also working with industry on what their needs are and-
Yeah. ... we work, you know, we work with them on how many people they think that they
need.
Yeah.
Um,
I mean, it could be business level micro-credentials, right?
Rather than actually formally through a tertiary education program.
But I guess the commentary in Nelson is definitely there's a gap.
Yeah.
Um-
... and, and you know,
obviously being an Nelson MP but also as a spokesperson-
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. ... you know, we do obviously have a...
We have a massive stake in this industry-
Yes.
... um, as a region. So that is a gap and it's just a question of how much can
MPI draw on their resources and their influence in order to try to, you know,
improve those opportunities in order to get that growth
in, you know?
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Which we, we all want to see.
It's a fair point, because, because, you know, I mean, I think in our minds what
we're seeing is, you know, we've got some large
industry sectors in New Zealand, uh, sheep and beef sectors
about, you know, 12, 12 billion, horticulture
sectors about nine... Um, there's no reason why the
aquaculture sector wouldn't be sitting up there.
But then you're talking quite a big scale up across the board.
Yeah.
Facilities, capabilities as you talked about, science, investments and so
on to be able to kind of create another industry of scale in New Zealand.
That, that, that's our opportunity because we really haven't used the sea.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and so, uh,
it's a massive... You know, it's a massive opportunity and it's one that we can do
with relatively low environmental impacts.
I mean, everything im- impacts the environment, but it's relatively low.
Yeah.
Um, and particularly if we get out in the open ocean, I think that kind of deals
with some of the other biosecurity concerns and things as well. So...
Yeah, you're right. It, it's a big opportunity for South Island.
Yeah. Would you, um... just sounds like you're an advocate for the blue economy,
which is great (laughs) . Um, but would you, would you look at, you know,
reinstating funding for, you know, an organization like Moana Nui
and, and pushing that aro- actually around the, the country?
Obviously it's been great for Nelson, but, um, you know,
looking at that ability to collaborate and then seek that.
You know, work together to seek investment into some of those projects, and whether
that could be scaled up around the country. 'Cause it was a small investment.
Yeah.
Only half a million dollars, but massive impact.
Yeah. I suppose I'm a little bit uncertain about the
impact.
(laughs) okay.
(laughs)
We could have a conversation tonight about that.
Yeah, yeah. (laughs) They, they tell a great story.
Well it's, well, there has been examples,
And it's good work, yeah, yeah.
Of, of foreign investment coming in and helping create jobs in
the sector.
Yeah.
And in a way that is about transforming the sector, so.
Yeah. Well, it's things like that or wilding ponds.
(laughs)
Fine, I take both.
We need them all.
We'll both take both. Bye.
Steve.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, (clears throat)
the... it feels to me, in the course of my interest in, uh,
wild fisheries, that, um, there's been this
perennial conversation about cameras on boats, and has been pushed back and
pushed back and pushed back, and not wanted.
There's now a s- a substantial roll out.
Um, can you tell us how, in the last year, that it's gone?
Um, where it's at? What the next steps are?
And
what is industry's response? Obviously, um, the
motive behind it has been often coming from conservation
interests, but what is, how is industry now coping
with cameras on boats, and what's their attitude towards it?
A few things in there.
Yeah, yeah.
Uh, first is, we're really pleased with the camera program.
Yeah.
Um, so we're on, I think it's 219 boats
currently. So we've completed...
Well, all of the kind of defined, in-scope vessels now have
cameras on them. Uh, we've got review teams in Wellington and
Nelson. So, you know, stuff's uploaded through the SPARK 4G network, so our review
teams gets reviewed, what have you.
So, so, uh, the system is running, it's running well.
What we saw up front
was a, a material increase in reporting of protected
species, and to a lesser extent, um, you know,
fish, uh, species caught. Um, that's what you'd expect
internationally. When you increase either a camera or observer coverage, you get
better reporting. So we're really pleased with that, because it gives us the
opportunity to use the data that fishers report to us every
day electronically-
Mm.
... uh, better, to, uh, to help manage fisheries.
And, you know, in the background, our team, they have a whole lot of dashboards and
stuff that they can run around some of that, which is proving really
useful. Uh, in terms of the industry, uh, I, I think industry have
always wanted, um, if there are gonna be cameras, where's the value for
them? Uh, and one of the proposals that...
In the Fisheries Reform that the minister's announced that will be coming to this
committee-
(laughs)
... next year,
uh, is, is for monitored discarding of fish.
So if there's a camera or an observer on a vessel, uh,
then people are empowered to discard any fish they've caught as long as it counted
against their annual catch entitlement.
So for some, uh, inshore fishes, which
is where the cameras are, um, operating inside a mixed trawl fishery where it
can be quite hard to predict what you are going to catch and what have
you, they see that as a material benefit.
Noting, like I said, they still got to count it against, against their quota,
so, and it doesn't lead to more discarding.
Um,
the... So yeah, I mean, our-
I agree.
... our team are obviously dealing with fishes every day over
some issue to do with a camera. You know, one of them, you know,
both, both might have three or four cameras, one of the cameras isn't working, or
it's, you know, there's always, there's always a thing, right?
And mo- most of those interactions are pretty good, and, you know, it's
become part of the, part of the furniture.
It's not saying everyone loves the idea of it, but it's partly how things work now.
(clears throat) Is that (coughs) increase in the
reported, um,
i- inappropriate cap an indication that
previously for some time we've had under-reporting of that?
Well, uh, it's just, it's really well known through all fisheries literature that
when you have monitoring through observers or cameras, you get better reporting.
So that's what we've seen.
Okay. Rachel?
I realize that my question is a completely different line of questioning, but might
sit more with, um, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
But, um, uh, you might have some intel,
so... (laughs) Uh, is there any progress towards, um, ratifying the HiC
Treaty?
(laughs)
(laughs) I think it does sit with the Ministry of Foreign...
It does, but would (overlapping dialogue)
It does sit with...
Yeah, exactly. ... something that you would have a function in the, in the
department that would be... 'Cause it will have an impa...
You know, it can lead to potentially, you know, more marine protected
areas.
Yeah.
And that will then have an impact on, um, on some
companies in terms of where they are able to under...
Yeah, so-
Yeah, so we,
we- ... like monitoring. So.
We'll, we'll have fed into, into it.
Yeah.
But it, it, it's in fair-
... infactly because-
Yes.
... it goes beyond-
This will explain why the WPQs from the, the, um-
Have gone there.
Ha- Ha... From the Minister of Foreign Affairs are more detailed.
(laughs)
I say that with, uh, uh, in a, in a generous way, but (laughs)
-
As Jo said, we don't have enough staff to answer all those.
(laughs)
I was just hoping that maybe someone might have a little bit of, you know, like
secret intelligence that's hidden away somewhere.
Secret intelligence?
(laughs)
They wouldn't be telling us, if it was secret.
We're asking.
Yeah, true.
Um,
right. Any further questions?
All right, we'll move on then to Forest
Service.
I'm
(whispers) .
Stay alive.
(laughs) Where was I at? Can we take a quick break because just-
To push his context, at least-
Yeah, she's-
It's 5:00.
At 12:45.
So we're 15-
We'll start and then she can come in.
She might be-
As long as-
Well, we don't know that. She could be in another committee. Yeah. We did have a...
This is why we had a discussion around the break times today so that we have, we
have
no
Welcome.
Hello.
Been waiting your turn patiently.
(laughs)
Like a, like a tree. (laughs)
(laughs) (laughs)
(laughs) It's been a whole rotation.
Yeah, I'd, I'd quite like a, a,
a update on the last 12 months, you
know, of where the Forest First Service is
Um, there's, um, a bit of work that
we're doing on our side of the House around some, um,
particularly f- fire stuff that, um,
we're quite keen on adopting some of the Fire Service,
um,
m- regulations and, and, and standards of practice
and, and seeing if we can adapt them to the, um,
further, the wider, um,
forestry, um, industry in the country.
Um, so,
I'll leave it with you to give us an update on this, of, of what you've
done in the past 12 months
and, um... Yeah.
Right. Um, well, I, I guess last 12 months, uh,
focus has really come down to three priorities.
One, contributing, uh, to the economic growth.
Yep.
Forestry and wood processing is a significant contributor.
So, uh, for the first time, uh, we've exceeded $6 billion in export
receipt. And, um, I think what's really important within that six billion
is, uh, uh, added value products. So,
uh, for the first time ever, uh, we've exceeded $1 billion
of value-added products export. So that's a really important
milestone. Um, the second
priority or, or focus area has, has been contributing
to, um, climate change commitments.
Uh, and so forestry is obviously-
(coughs)
... uh, um, a significant, uh, removal, uh, as part of the Emissions Trading
Scheme. But beyond that, there's been a really strong focus to, uh,
support more timber in the build environment.
So we've got this lovely building site just next to us here.
Uh, the Parliamentary Precinct, uh, that building will house...
Well, you guys will know more about this building than probably I do.
Uh, but what's really important is-
(coughs)
... due to seismic and, and other reasons, it's being built out of engineered
timber.
Yes.
That's
So it's products that's coming off from-
Yes, bye.
... Nelson.
(laughs)
Uh, we've got some lovely LVL beams coming up-
Yep. ... from Nelson Pine Industries.
Mm-hmm.
And then we've got some glulam columns, uh, and Stelt panels coming down from
Rotorua. Uh, and, and so construction is
a, a significant contributor to, to carbon emissions in the New Zealand economy.
So, um, we're, we're pretty excited about the
opportunity of getting more mass timber, uh, into the build
environment. Uh, the third priority of Miles is, is, is around
supporting sustainable land use and, and climate change.
Uh, and, and maybe that's where your, the second part of your question will, will
lead us. Um, and, and so like all
industry, uh,
you know, it, it needs to be supported by sustainable practices, uh, and
climate resilient forests. And, and that's a really important aspect of, of
that, of that work program as well.
So specifically with, within the fire, uh,
clearly, uh, FENZ has a statutory responsibility for
preparedness-
Hmm.
... response, fire safety. Um,
forestry can... Is a system, though, is a, is, uh, obviously a
participant in the rural sector. Um, and, and
so, um, we work really closely with FERNS,
FENZ, uh, and our, our partners within On Farm Support to
ensure that the communication that we're, we, uh, we are consistent and
coordinated in the way that we communicate with the rural sector.
Um, in, in terms of specific,
uh, uh, I guess behaviors and, and drivers
within the forestry sector, um, I, I think I talked about this last
time. A, a huge proportion of, uh, wildfire is not
started naturally. It's started by people.
So that's, um-
Mm-hmm.
(laughs) ... roadside ignitions that are, that are mobilized.
That's burning off, um, heaps. Uh, it's rubbish.
Uh, uh, it's... And, and, you know, and then we move on to the more-
(coughs)
... kind of, I, I guess, natural situations.
You've got, um, uh, hedges,
windrows that are connecting with power lines during, um, you know, high
wind events. And we see that a lot in Canterbury of course.
Um, so the first point would be, uh, 98% of fire is,
wildfire is started by people. So it's a management, it's a
people-based issue. The second point would be, uh,
forest owners, um,
particularly corporate forest owners, are, are fairly motivated.
You think how much value is tied up in that asset.
(clears throat)
The last thing you want is for that asset to be burned down.
And, and so whilst, uh, majority of small forest owners are
insured, uh, the way that large forest owners, uh, approach
protection and maintenance is largely an approach of self-insurance.
And what that means is investment capability, investment in
systems, and investment in plant and, and equipment.
Um, and so-Many of our large corporate forest owners in
New Zealand will have industry agreements with FENZ.
And so, that's, uh, they maintain their gear, their systems and they have a
legislative, uh, I guess, a-ability to act,
um,
a-a-a-alongside a FENZ representative.
And quick pro quo is that that gear can be used,
uh, on, on, for, for fire, fire outside of forestry as
well. Um,
there are some changes coming to the way that FENZ, uh, cost
recover. Um, and then-
Yeah.
... uh, those changes will, will land mid-midway through
2026. Uh, and you'll be aware, of course, FENZ is going through a bit of a-
(coughs)
... organisational reset at the moment as well.
Um, so I'll, I'll, I'll pause there.
But, um,
uh, whilst we don't have a statutory a-, I guess, uh, uh, ability
here, we, we have, uh, a large interest in, in supporting
the sector to be, uh, to, to mitigate that risk as much as
possible.
I think
a lot of what the sector does is based on
what the forestry service did, did back in the day and the, and the standards
they'd seek because, um-
(clears throat)
... they're pretty good standards really.
So, and, um, a number of
the carbon forest,
uh, organizations don't have the same standards as
the commercial forest do which is a bit concerning really.
Steve. Yeah. Um,
(clears throat) I guess there's so many questions about this.
But the, um, I don't know if I fully agree with
the standards of the sort of expectations around we do, the way
we do forest harvesting of plantation.
Um, just being in the, in, uh, Nelson Lakes region this-
Mm-hmm.
... last weekend seeing-
... classic clear fell hillside.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, just how
we've been doing it for
50 years and we haven't
got a better way of doing it. There are better ways of doing it, but we're not
implementing them. I wonder
as part of your program, like, how much
are you innovating or seeking pathways to innovate
around more sustainable harvesting of plantation
forestry? Um, one of the obvious thoughts was
that, uh, in managing the wilding
pines, they can't spray in the riparian strip, so you get these vast
areas of pines taken out.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
But the- Yep. ... riparian is still full on. Um, is
there an opportunity for riparian planting permanent native forest
even where you have plantation
forestry
so that you get something of a buffer for
slash-
Yeah, yeah.
... um, and you get a healthy biodiversity strip
alongside waterways
and you don't have a source of, um, pine
seed for future problems in waterways as
well? That's a big question, I suppose, but ..........................
So, I'll try to break that down. Um, the NES for commercial forestry-
Yeah.
... uh, uh, applies a setback-
Yep.
... uh, from, uh, watercourses and riparians, and that depends on the
size of that watercourse and riparian.
So naturally, you do get that riparian buffer through that.
Uh, there also is a provision within the NESCF to control,
uh, wildings with- within wetlands.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, so that's a, a separate part to your question.
I think what, what you highlighted there is, um, within
large clearfell settings, particularly with fixed-taller logging, uh,
a, a common practice in the past was to extract from ridgeline to
ridgeline.
Mm-hmm.
Which would include extracting over a watercourse, uh, and, and
you get some, you, you do get some d-damage of that riparian
vegetation. I think what we've seen is, uh, a
really, a strong move, particularly in Tairawhiti
in, in the East Coast where that practice has changed to a single-phase
extraction. And we're using, uh, different harvesting
systems. So instead of doing two phases at once, you're extracting a single
phase and moving to the other single phase to eliminate the need to
extract over a riparian. So, the, the, the value of
riparian both in bi-biodiversity and also as you highlight
a, a, a natural vegetative-
Oh.
... debris catcher is, is, is recognized and
where it's possible to avoid damage, uh, that is
a, a very common approach that we're seeing industry move now.
Can I follow up? Yep. It's kind of a broad right tree, right
place question, I suppose. Because, um,
the other concern that we have with the new emissions trading scheme
settings is that it's pushing more forestry up into seven and eight
land,
um, which is more likely to be the future
wildfires in, in 20, 30 years
as we get worse droughts and higher incidents of those as
predicted by ..........................
But also the potential that it will never be commercial harvested,
this, this forestry that might get sort of abandoned,
depending on future cost settings.
Um, I wonder how you keep a track of that.
And the second part of that question is,
there's still Douglas Fir being planted
commercially and
do we need to have greater restrictions on where
something
has the potential to be such an in- aggressive invader of,
uh, farmland and conservation land
should be planted, and perhaps it shouldn't be being planted at
all?
Cool. Um, the first part to your question, uh,
Steve, um, so LUC is obviously a measure of, um, land use
capability, versatility.
Not, not necessarily a, a measure of fire
risk.Um, so I think y- y- your
comment though a- around LUC7 and eight, right now
in the ETS we have about 850,000 hectares registered in the
ETS. 10% is one to five. Uh,
57% is LUC6, uh, and the balance w- whatever
that is, is it, uh, 33, is, is, uh, seven to
eight. So, you're, you're absolutely correct with the new
legislation, uh, that's coming from the, uh, 31st of
October. We haven't seen yet the, the impact
that will have on afforestation. At a high level, um,
if, if, uh, a landowner can plant 25% of their property onto
five, there's a ballot system for LUC6-
That's right.
... at 15,000.
Yep.
So, um, it, it could be anticipated that we're
gonna see lower levels of total afforestation, but that type of
afforestation will look a little bit different.
So, um, farmers, landowners will have the opportunity to plant smaller parts
of, of their block if they so wish. So there's optionality there.
Uh, natives, uh, will be exempt. Uh,
Māori will be exempt. Uh, and, and LUC7 and eight is
exempt. So
if, if more afforestation is, is occurring on that seven and eight, seven,
parts of seven, uh, historically had been part of the commercial kind of
production estate. Uh, but you're right, it gets, the upper parts
of seven and eight, uh, are probably more suited to a permanent type of regime.
Yep. So my final question on that would be a- oh, I, you still had the Douglas fir
question to ask,
Yes. The D-FIR,
um,
within the NSECF, uh, there is a wilding calculator which,
uh, is an approach at assessing risk before afforestation and
is part of regrowth.
And, and that looks at, uh, species, it looks at,
uh, wind, it looks like exposure aspect,
neighboring land use.
Mm-hmm.
So there's an assessment of risk which, uh, informs the consenting
regime. So if, if the risk comes back high, that goes into
a restricted, restricted discretionary regime where council can actually
put conditions on that afforestation.
Alongside that, what we're seeing, you know, Centra- uh, Otago,
Canterbury, uh, forest owners that have, have traditionally had
parts of their estate D-FIR'ed because it is more suitable for a high altitude
planting. Uh-
(coughs)
... it is a bit more resilient to those, uh, Southland a- a- and
Highland weather events. Um, as they are going to
restocking, more and more, uh, uh, are moving to
a, a hybrid attenuator. So moving away from actually
D-FIR. So, uh, in a way, uh, forest owners, uh,
technology's become available where they've, they've created a hybrid
radiator attenuator.
Mm-hmm.
Which is, uh, can, can operate and, and,
and thrive within the D-FIR growing conditions-
Yeah.
... but doesn't have the same wilding risk.
The last point I'd make on that is-
Mm-hmm.
... gene technology reform, clearly there's a lot of interest and there's been a
lot of investment around, uh, uh, l- laboratory level
investment looking at the opportunity of sterile-
Yeah.
... de- desexing D-FIRS essentially.
Mm-hmm. And my, my final one will be about how much, what percentage of that One
Billion Tree program is indigenous, permanent indigenous?
The One Billion Tree program from the coalition government in
2017?
Yeah, or the, hmm, that's all, that's ongoing though right?
Yes.
Yeah. Well, so, uh, we're in year six or year seven of, of,
um,
that One Billion Tree program. I couldn't give you the figure
exactly that has been indigenous, but out of the
ETS,
uh, 20% is indigenous. So I mentioned that figure of
870,000 hectares-
Mm-hmm. ... is r- registered in the ETS. So that's post '89
afforestation, new forest planting, 20% is
indigenous. Um, I think
60,000.
Mm-hmm. Uh, Kaushal.
Kia ora, kia ora koutou.
Um, so anecdotally, you know, we see on the
coast no logging trucks.
Mm-hmm.
But can you give us a snapshot of the reality of what's happening for the
workforce?
Mm-hmm.
And there's a lot of talk about innovation, which is of course exciting.
So what's happening in workforce development to keep people in the industry
and keep the industry alive, however that may look in the future?
Yeah. And, and, um, uh, the minister on Monday responded,
uh, with- to your question and, and highlighted the support, I guess, for
the whole value chain. Uh, and, and, and that's one thing I guess that's going to
cement jobs on the East Coast in forestry is certainty of
operation, certainty of, of,
industry. So, um, that program I guess is broken down
into three components. One is the, is the debris.
We're still working through the large woody debris issues of 2023
event. Um, and, and so half a million ton has,
has been treated to date. Uh, right now there's, there's six crews
operating, uh, working through a program which is funded by
central government. GDC is, is responsible for that.
Um, and that program will continue for another 18, 18 months at least.
But probably the second, uh, aspect o- o- of that
is, uh, GDC right now, uh, as you know, have
worked very closely with-
(coughs)
... industry, uh, uh, around resetting the rules, uh,
the local ru- rules, which apply to forestry
activities. Um, and that's included looking at transitional
impacts, uh, looking at alternative
practices, uh, as you highlighted as, as well Steve.
Um, and so about 70,000 hectares of production
forestry or area that was classed as production forestry has
been mapped as, as, as, uh, uh, an
overlay which needs to transition to a lower intensity, uh, land
use. Um, and, and so within that change, clearly there's
rules and there's relationships.
Um, we're working very closely with GDC to support,
uh-... um, a transition of the rules and a coordination of
the rules between central and local government.
Uh, also, I know there's a lot of work happening at, at, on the ground
between GDC and, and iwi and industry to support a rebuild of
the relationships.
You're allergic to that (laughs)
So trust and confidence has, has been a, a, a, a big
thing. Um, alongside that, um, y-
your question, Kush, on Monday asked for direct examples of, uh,
how is the government supporting its industry to restart?
Ooh.
Uh, and, and particularly Maori as well, uh, within that.
And, and so there's a number of examples.
Uh, I talked a little bit earlier, uh, Steve, about the Wood Processing Growth
Fund. So there's, there's three...
We've, we've funded three different, uh, through, through that Wood Processing
Growth Fund. Uh, one, Summit Forestry, they did due diligence
on a mill in Ruatoria. That was, that was a year and a half ago.
Unfortunately, that, that w- uh, that diligence didn't evolve into
the next step.
(laughs)
But the work's being done and we've got the data and the intel to support whoever
next will look at that. Um, the, the second one there,
Woodywood, uh, Engineering Technology week down there in Dunstan Road,
southern end of Gisborne. Uh, we've, uh, entered into a catalyst
agreement with them to support their work to unlock standards in the
Australian timber, uh, market. Uh, and the third one there
is Kiwi Lumber. Um, and, and again, down there in Gisborne, we've, we've
entered into a co-funding arrangement for them to help them optimize their
grading systems.
Mm-hmm.
And, and so it's... Hopefully, I'm just trying to build a picture that it's, it's
at all parts of it. There's certainty in rules, uh, but we know
a big thing, uh, there is also strengthening domestic markets,
so you're moving away from relying strongly on an export market.
Yeah. Well, I mean, you would have heard me ask this on Monday as well, but
(inaudible)
what options are there for people who just
believe that they can't afford or it's not profitable for them to get logs to
Gisborne?
Yeah.
So, what, you know, what other technologies are being looked at or uses so that the
trees don't just die?
Um, yeah, un- unfortunately, distance to market is one thing we can't change,
can we?
Mm-hmm.
Uh, um, and, and so those decisions have largely been made.
And, and you're absolutely spot on. The further you get up the coast, it's logic.
Uh, you know, you're 200 Ks from a market, uh, and when it's costing you 40 or
50 bucks a ton to get your prod- product to a, to the
port, that's a huge hit on your return.
Mm-hmm.
Um, what, what are your options? Um,
Te Uru Rākau has done a lot of work partnering with the Maori Agribusiness Lends
team to look, uh, at, particularly at the property level, at the whenua
trust level, around, uh, options for, uh,
assisted natural regeneration and, um, registration of
indigenous, uh, in- in- into the ETS.
So that's an important, uh, opportunity.
Uh, equally, we know there's a lot of, uh, a number of
Maori trusts, uh, are looking very closely at voluntary, um,
networks, um, nature-based credit systems as well.
And, and so Minister Hoger made an announcement in early
2024, mid-2024, uh,
a- about, uh, what the government's doing to support, uh,
nature based products and, and that work is underway.
Thank you.
Any further questions?
Just a very quick sup on Cushless.
Oh, yes. Yes.
Um- Thanks.
... tell me, uh, I've heard a few people talk about the potential of
deconstructing the fiber in wood.
Yes.
What's that look like?
Um, the, the humble radiator pine is,
uh, a pretty amazing (laughs) product when you break it down.
And, and so, uh, uh, it's, it's a third cellulose, a
third lignin, and a third other extractives.
So what we've seen, um, and I was fortunate enough to travel to Europe to see this
firsthand, is a growing bioproducts industry where
alongside, uh, industry and manufacturing, like lumber
and, and pulp and paper, uh, processes, there's an opportunity
to, to use processing residue and, and break that down
even further into biochemicals and then use those chemicals to replace
fossil-based chemicals in everyday products, like stains or
adhesives, surfactants. So, uh, there's, there's a
real
awesome opportunity for New Zealand given our fiber-rich position,
uh, to, to leverage more value from the resource that we've
got. And it doesn't involve more planting. We don't need... It, it...
We don't need more resource. It's already there.
Mm-hmm.
So wi- within the construct of a, of an export double
program, we- we're clearly trying to grow new markets and strengthen
existing markets for solid lumber, for logs, and for
engineered products. But, uh, a bioproducts industry is equally
a, a really important growth opportunity.
Uh, and we're looking at closely around how we partner with industry to
create, uh, an environment where we see more investment in that space.
Yep. Yep.
Yeah. I mean, we got a hell of a load of trees.
We do.
(laughs)
And, uh-
We need to do more with them.
Yes. That's right. And, and so that's sort of part of my question because
obviously, um, the value add, the maximizing the
value out of a, any wood or fiber product that we can
is, is the, um, the Holy Grail.
How much, um, investment is there in that depth of
innovation-
Mm-hmm.
... as against how much are we still just a commodity log
provider
to the world and we send a, a raw-
Yeah.
... log away and they turn it into something that's worth a whole lot more money
and sell it back to us or to other people?
Yeah. Uh, I'll start with there's...
It's not perfect and, and there's huge opportunity.
Yeah.
Uh, and as I highlighted, uh, Mike, your question there, uh,
there's, there's opportunity for a public element of
investment to create that, uh, environment for that
innovation. Um,
alongside that-... wood processes, uh,
investing, uh, and that a lot of them do it quietly.
But, um, y- you know, we're seeing a huge shift, I guess, from
kind of mass standardization in the way that we process logs.
But using innovation, using digital technologies,
um, uh, real time response, you know,
servicing a number of markets all around the globe.
So, w- we are seeing a lot of development in that space.
What we're not yet seeing is a, a huge lift yet
in the quantity that's being processed, I'm sure.
So, we're seeing investment, uh, it's improving returns, it's
improving, I guess, productivity and, and, uh, customer
response, but we're not seeing a huge lift in the quantity being
processed. So, there's al- there's always opportunity.
Um, just three weeks ago, so, uh, a business
delegation went to India, uh, and what we're seeing there
is a, a really exciting conversation and opportunity within what we know
is a, is a rapidly growing and large economy, or number of
economies within India. But what's exciting is it's forest growers
and wood processors working together and looking at how collectively can
we enter a new market, and how can we learn from what, what
occurred in China 20, 30 years ago, and how do we, how do we take steps
now so we're not creating a space where, in 15 years' time, it's
just solely a log market? So, it's, it's, it's,
it's complex and it's at all parts of the system, but, uh, a lot of it,
uh, we are sort of starting to see a bit of a change and it, and it, it's coming
down to a bit more coordination.
Follows up on that, just... yeah. So, wh- what is the risk when we're
seeing
mill closures
and that we're losing that capability to add local
value or provide for local markets? Um.
Yeah.
Y- you know, and is, is there a need for the
Parliament to consider more intervention to make sure we don't
lose capability?
Um, first, acknowledging the risk and the downsides.
So, East Valley Sawmill, um, 140
jobs.
Terrible.
That's terrible.
Yeah.
And, and, and that part of the country has had a number of hits in, in different
sectors as well. So, um, when mills close, regional
economies hurt-
Yeah.
... and, and, you know, that's, that's the fact.
Um, the, the other fact though with that closure in East Valley,
............................ is that production, they've invested
significantly into their ............................
Yeah. So, that production's not lost, it's just moved.
But that doesn't help the 140 people clearly.
Right.
Um, so is, is there a need to do more?
Um,
look, uh,
the government can't ... cor- corporates will make decisions, won't
they? Uh, and it's not as though ............................
came, came to us and said, "We need help." They didn't need help.
It, it was a business, it was a planned decision-
Sure.
... uh, in the consolidation that they're, that they're operating with.
Um, there are cases, uh, in Kinleith, for
example, where we're, uh, we are working with, with
OG so that key industrial site there, pulp and paper mill-
Mm-hmm.
... in the middle of the CNI takanoa, uh, we are, we are working
alongside that organization to see if there's anything to, to
support, uh, that, that central government can,
can provide, particularly around energy
security.
Thank you for that. Thank you. Well, um,
there's run out of questions, so-
(laughs)
... see you guys-
See you at 5 o'clock. (laughs)
Yeah. (laughs)
(laughs) Speaking with
enthusiasm. (laughs)
Yeah, Ray, you should, you should be a lot more
enthusiastic. (laughs)
(laughs) Coolness galore. Yeah. Ready for a life.
No, thank you very much for your time and, um,
for the answers you've given, and I'm sure there'll be pos- possibly a few
written questions that follow up, um,
from the committee. That's, um-
That's tough stuff (laughs)
Very good. Thank you very much.
(laughs) Very good. Thank you.
Thank
you. Thank you.